
--- Page 1 ---
 
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
 
M E S S A G E  F O R  2 0 2 2 - 2 0 2 3   
 
The 2021-22 season has been pointed out by the two following aspects: the stricter assessment of setting 
using the overhand with fingers technique, aiming at reinstating the appropriate implementation of the 
Official BVB rules. This was necessary due to the fact that following the Tokyo Olympics, there has been a 
noticeable trend in teams and referees respectively relaxing overhand setting techniques and the assessment 
criteria for this action. Expectations are that this process is now complete and assimilated by all concerned 
parties, and so allow a smooth refereeing for the upcoming Olympic Qualification period; the implementation of 
a test for a new Ball Mark Protocol at three events at the initial stage of the season. The new Ball Mark 
Protocol has been approved for implementation from 2023 and onwards.  
Another aspect that requires a high level of focus, refers to the accurate implementation of the new Medical 
Assistance protocols, with the emphasis being that we are currently introducing important changes to the 
adjustments initiated at this aspect of the game in 2019-20. This specifically refers to a new scale in the use of 
the RIT by a given player during a match. 
Other important aspect refers to the on-court referee’s relation with the athletes. We strongly encourage the 
referees to conduct the game with authority, and refrain from authoritarianism. Authority is linked to 
leadership, posture, command; It aims to lead game participants to perceive and respect the rules code, 
judging their legitimacy and advancing in the establishment of the greater good. Authoritarianism, on the 
contrary, it is the imposition of something by force. Remember the referee stays in the background but at the 
same time acts to promote the game in the best light, and in this way the game is attractive to a wider 
audience. We want the game to be popular. Making an attractive show is the way to do that. 
Starting from 2014, in addition to guidelines and instructions, this document also includes all relevant protocols 
(i.e., Official Match Protocol; Forfeit and Default Protocol; (new) Ball Mark Protocol; (new) Medical Assistance 
Protocols; Protest Protocol; and First Referee Verbal Communication with the Audience).  
It is hoped that its update year after year, aiming at reflecting the various rule and officiating developments, will 
be both informative and challenging. It should be read in conjunction with the 2021-2024 edition of the Official 
Beach Volleyball Rules, which include changes that have also impacted here, and the Casebook. All these 
together, as a package, form the foundation of our officiating references. 
A new era at the FIVB encourages our governing bodies to bring Beach Volleyball closer and become more 
integrated into the overall organisational structure, all driven by “innovation”. The game needs to adapt better 
to the desires of the various stakeholders with an emphasis on TV; therefore, our Officials (Referee Coaches, 
Referees, etc.) must understand their extremely important role in marketing Volleyball and Beach Volleyball.  
In line with this, the FIVB has strongly invested in bringing new modern technologies to assist referees with the 
highest possible conditions. These include the “electronic scoresheet”, the “wireless referee communication”, 
and the “challenge system” – all are excellent tools for helping our referees to serve our sport at the highest 
possible level of competence. The challenge here is that referees need to understand that even if technology 
is there to support them, their personal commitment and existing expertise is also vital. Embracing this new 
approach requires a spirit of progress and responsibility. Technology will only help if you know how to use it.  
 
 
 
Best of luck with your officiating in 2022-23 
José Casanova 
FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Commissioner  
Referees must pay particular attention to 
several relevant highlights on the criteria for 
enforcing the Official Rules, maintaining both 
consistency and universal criteria at all times. 
The quality of officiating in these particular 
areas is a key factor in the successful 
communication to all parties of the criteria and 
the objectives defined by the FIVB (players, 
officials, spectators, television, media, and 
promoters). 
It is with this in mind that we strongly 
recommend that you read carefully this 
document and understand its main areas of 
emphasis while applying the spirit and 
meaning of these during your officiating. 
 
--- Page 2 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 1 
 
 
 
C O N T E X T  F O R  O F F I C I A T I N G  
 
REFEREES apply the rules of the game. Officiating at Beach Volleyball events requires constant 
awareness to any change and / or interpretation of the official Beach Volleyball rules. For the correct 
application of the rules, REFEREES must know them faultlessly and apply them decisively and correctly 
within the context of the game. 
 
The rules must reflect the demands of the   
development of the sport. When they are 
formulated and / or modified, the following factors 
should naturally be taken into consideration: 
 Technical and tactical development 
 Spectacularity 
 Publicity, marketing and promotion 
 Financial requirements 
 Cultural, recreational and societal changes 
 
REFEREES must be able to take correct decisions 
with authority whenever a situation arises which is 
not specifically clarified in the rules. REFEREES 
therefore should have a complete knowledge of the 
theoretical Refereeing guidelines and of the 
general functions of the rules, which: 
 Define the characteristics of the game 
 Define proper techniques 
 Allow the game to be played safely under fair conditions 
 Encourage sportsmanship 
 Encourage top performance and spectacularity 
 Allow a game that can be marketed and promoted well 
 
This will allow REFEREES to work much more accurately and follow the “spirit of the rules”. 
 
P E R F O R M A N C E  O F  O F F I C I A L S  
 
The FIVB Refereeing Coach is responsible for all refereeing issues and reports to the FIVB Technical 
Delegate. The FIVB Refereeing Coach will work to instruct, facilitate the work of and provide feedback to 
officials working in various capacities. 
 
REFEREES also work under close co-ordination with the Refereeing Manager at a given event. Together 
with the Host TV Broadcaster, Promoter and other Officials, REFEREES must also ensure that production 
and organisational needs of television are met. These include match protocol, TV replays, official 
photographer and TV camera positions on the field of play. 
 
Although Beach Volleyball is a modality of Volleyball, there are fundamental differences in the playing 
numbers, techniques of the players, match formats and nature of the conditions, which guide the 
differences in the rules between these two games. Therefore, there are refereeing techniques, 
interpretations, protocols and situations, which are different. REFEREES must understand these clearly. 
 
In conclusion, REFEREES not only have to perform their duties and direct the match according to the rule 
text and its spirit, but their refereeing performance is also governed by contributing factors such as health 
(physical and mental), legal factors (health and safety laws, drug testing and Referees’ Ethics Code), and 
social factors which are not purely technical in nature. REFEREES should always remember that they are 
not only there to officiate, they are also teacher, promoter and administrator and may be required to assist 
the Referee Coach if requested. In this way they have a delegated responsibility to act in the best interests 
of the FIVB and its various stakeholders. REFEREES should be closely aware of these factors, conduct 
their duties following ethical considerations both on and off the court, while also directing the match 
accordingly under the rules. 

--- Page 3 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 2 
 
 
1 .  P L A Y I N G  A R E A  
 
1. One day before the competition, the FIVB Delegates, 
with the assistance of the REFEREES, must confirm 
that the dimensions as well as the quality and safety of 
the boundary lines and all other sport equipment, meet 
the FIVB requirements.  
2. Before the start of every daily session the 
REFEREES must check that: 
2.1 The net is perpendicular to the court and the 
dimensions of the boundary lines and free zone are 
accurate. 
Note: In a square court (8m x 8m for one side), the 
length of the short diagonals (11.31 meters) must be 
equal.  
2.2 The playing area, sand condition and sport equipment are safe for the players and officials. 
Note: Boundary lines must be properly secured and present no danger to players. Exposed hooks, 
metal fastening devices or spikes to hold the lines in place are not acceptable. 
Note: The relevant FIVB Delegate(s) take the final decision if temperatures and/or poor weather 
conditions make it unsafe to play. 
3. Prior to each match officiated, the REFEREES must, during the warm up time, inspect the court and 
free zone area checking its symmetry, safety and general condition. 
Note: During the match, the SECOND REFEREE must pay attention to the fact, that the free zone must 
always be free from any obstacle which can cause an injury to a team member (drinking bottles, TV 
camera tripods, sand levellers rakes, etc.). 
4. The playing court is maintained by the sand levellers who are responsible for raking it during the 
game, between sets, and between matches. Six sand levellers will be used and placed outside the free 
zone as per diagram 6 in the Rules. Two sand levellers will rake the area under the net; two will rake the 
area around the boundary lines; and two will rake the service receptions positions and the service area.     
Note: The main purpose of this procedure is to:  
 secure that the sand is levelled inside the court and service area - the sand tends to become 
dug out in the service reception positions and uneven near the net;  
 ensure safe and equal conditions to either team; 
 prepare the sand to allow good officiating judgments - a flat area exists around all boundary 
lines both inside and outside the court lines in order to facilitate the work of the LINEJUDGES 
and the REFEREES to assess the “in” and “out” balls.   
Note: The SECOND REFEREE is responsible to check that this is done properly by the sand levellers 
and together with the LINEJUDGES they should continuously monitor during the match the condition of 
the lines and the playing court, ensuring that both courts are in equal condition. 
Note: Same principle applies for watering procedures which furthermore require prior authorization by 
the relevant FIVB Delegate(s). 
 
 
2 .   N E T  A N D  P O S T S  
 
REFEREES must check that: 
1. The height of the net must be as per Rule 2.1.  
Note: Before each match, after the sand has been levelled, the SECOND REFEREE must check the 
height of the net before the coin toss. The first referee remains near the second referee during this 
verification to supervise the measurement.  
2. The net, posts and referee's stand are properly padded so that a player is not a risk of injury from 
exposed hard or sharp surfaces. 
Note: If REFEREES feel that the equipment is not in accordance with the rules, they must immediately 
inform the relevant FIVB Delegate(s) or the Court Manager to ensure the problem is fixed. 
3. The length of the net is 8.5m and the distance from outside each sideline to the respective post is 
between 0.7 and 1m. 
Note: For FIVB, World and Official Competitions the REFEREE must ensure that the net meets all 
requirements in accordance with respective FIVB marketing regulations. 
Note: During the game (and especially at the beginning of each set), the corresponding LINEJUDGE(S) 
must check whether the side bands are exactly perpendicular to the playing surface and placed directly 
above each side line and whether the antennae are just at the outer edge of each side band. If this is 
not the case, they should be readjusted immediately.  
 
--- Page 4 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 3 
 
4. Equipment must be as specified in Rules 2.1 to 2.6. Only FIVB approved equipment is used for FIVB, 
World and Official Competitions.  
Note: Additional equipment: benches for the teams, SCORER’S table, a stand for the FIRST 
REFEREE, a rod to measure the height of the net, a pressure gauge for checking the pressure of the 
match balls, a pump, a set of numbered paddles 1 and 2, a table scoreboard, a set of 4 flags for the 
LINEJUDGES, at least 2 levelling rakes, towels for ball-retrievers, an ice chest, a medical first aid kit, a 
measuring tape (minimum 20m). A scoreboard and a system for watering the court are compulsory for 
FIVB, World and Official Competitions. 
Note: The organizer must also provide reserve equipment as well as umbrellas and ice chests plus 
water at the team’s areas. Throughout the match, the SECOND REFEREE is responsible to monitor 
that water is always available for the players.  
 
3 .   B A L L S  
 
1. The Mikasa BV550C, (67 cm circumference: ±1 cm) the exclusive and official ball for FIVB, World 
and Official Competitions, is used. 
Note: For FIVB, World and Official Competitions, FIVB homologated balls are provided by Mikasa to the 
competition organisers, and controlled for the competition by the concerned FIVB Delegate(s) and 
further checked by the match REFEREES. 
2. The SECOND REFEREE takes possession of the 5 match balls before the match and checks that all 
of them have identical characteristics (colour, circumference, weight and pressure). Together with the 
FIRST REFEREE, he/she selects the four match balls and the reserve ball. The SECOND REFEREE is 
then responsible for them throughout the match and will assist returning the balls to the court manager 
at the conclusion of the match. 
Note: Players do not have the right to decide which balls will be used in their match. 
3. Reserve sets of 5 balls must be available in case of rainy conditions. In case the match balls get 
excessively heavy, the SECOND REFEREE is responsible to coordinate the process of replacement of 
the 5 match balls between sets. 
4. A four-ball system shall be implemented at FIVB, World and Official Competitions. Six ball retrievers 
will be used and placed in the free zone as per diagram 6 in the Rules. Before the start of the match, the 
ball retrievers on positions 2 and 5 plus the one (positions 1 or 4) on the side of the receiving team, will 
each receive a ball from the SECOND REFEREE who shall give the fourth ball to the server for the first 
and the deciding sets.  
During the match, when the ball is out of play: 
4.1 If the ball is outside the court, it will be recovered by the closest retriever and immediately rolled to 
the retriever who has just passed his/her ball to the player who was to serve.  
4.2 If the ball is on the court, the closest retriever preferably on positions 3 and 6 must immediately 
recover the ball and roll it to the retriever who has just passed his/her ball to the player who was to 
serve. (The ball is transferred between the ball retrievers by being rolled on the sand (not thrown), whilst 
the ball is out of play, preferably not in the side where the scorer’s table is situated.) 
4.3 At the moment the ball is out of play, so that the service can take place without any delay the ball 
retriever closest to the point in the court where the player going to serve will step out of the court, shall 
give the ball into the hands of the server as soon as he/she leaves the court. Specific instructions to ball 
retrievers in this respect must be made and emphasised at the practical clinic. 
 
4 .  T E A M S  
 
1. REFEREES must check that only the two players for each team indicated on the score sheet 
participate in the match. 
Note: In each team, one of these players will be the team captain and REFEREES must check that this 
is recorded on the score sheet prior to the match. 
2. REFEREES must verify that both players of either team are present to participate in the match. In 
case a player or a team might be missing, the SECOND REFEREE is responsible to inform the relevant 
FIVB Delegate(s) In order to attempt and find the missing player/ team.  
3. For FIVB, World and Official Competitions, external assistance or coaching is not allowed during the 
match. However, coaches are allowed in the court during the respective team’s warm-up until the start 
of the official match protocol. Where applicable, upon confirmation by the Referee Coach it is possible 
for the team coaches to stay until immediately before the start of the coin toss.  
Note: Team coaches are not allowed within the playing area during the match. If a team complains 
about the opponents receiving external assistance or if the REFEREES clearly see anyone coaching a 
team during a match, they must immediately pass this information to the relevant FIVB Delegate(s). 
REFEREES may be asked by the FIVB Technical Delegate to formally record the circumstances of 
such incident. 
--- Page 5 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 4 
 
Note: Coaches are allowed in all age group events and the phases 1 and 2 of the Continental Cup. 
4. Teams have designated timeout areas and must use the same area throughout the entire match. 
Note: Should any question arise as to the allocation of the designated timeout area it is allocated by 
coin toss (as per Rule 4.4). 
5. Players' uniforms shall comply with the tournament regulations. 
Note: Uniforms are checked before the tournament but the FIRST REFEREE must check that players 
always have matching uniforms, especially shorts / bathing suit bottoms that comply with the 
tournament regulations (including sponsorship dimensions, number of logos, accessories, and 
temporary tattoos). 
Note: The FIRST REFEREE should note the need to check uniforms for religious, racial, or political 
messages etc in order that they comply with IOC regulations. 
6. The FIRST REFEREE must check that the players wear the correct number (1 or 2) corresponding to 
their recorded name on the scoresheet. 
Note: In the case of matching uniforms and designation of chairs, Rule 4.4 shall apply (i.e.: coin toss). 
Note: If the players are found to be incorrectly wearing the wrong uniforms (numbers 1 and 2) before, 
during or after a match this will be corrected by changing the uniforms and or scoresheet and or serving 
player as appropriate. No penalty shall apply. 
7. The FIRST REFEREE may authorise players to wear footwear (socks/shoes). 
Note: Use of footwear may be appropriate because of sand conditions or possible injury, but players 
must receive the authorisation of the FIRST REFEREE before using socks / shoes. 
8. Players are free to use long sleeve/leggings at their preference, with the partners not being obliged to 
the same. No additional provisions including min temperate etc. shall be set as pre-conditions. 
Note: If both players in the team choose to wear long sleeve/leggings at same match, then the uniform 
shall be of same style and colour. 
Note: The general marketing regulations of competition concerned shall be respected in terms of 
manufacturer logo, sponsor space/size, etc. 
9. Rule 4.5.3 states “Compression pads (padded injury protection devices) may be worn for protection 
or support. For FIVB, World and Official Competitions for seniors, these devices or visible underwear 
must be of the same colour as part of the uniform. Black, white or neutral colours may be also used. 
Note: Forearm sleeves must have no padding or surface feature designed to give an advantage by 
providing additional ball control. Visible underwear must not be longer than the shorts.  
Note: Only one player may wear, but if both players do, they must wear the same colour.  
10. The players must wear approved uniforms from the time they enter until they leave the playing area. 
11. Players cannot wear forbidden objects, which may give them an artificial advantage or cause injury 
to themselves or other players. 
Note: Players wear glasses and contact lenses at their own risk. 
 
5 .  T E A M  L E A D E R S  ( C A P T A I N S )   
 
1. Only the Captain can speak to the REFEREES while the ball is out of play, providing it is done in 
accordance with Rule 5.1.2. Players have NO right to question judgement calls - this includes, but is not 
limited to, actions of players setting overhand with fingers. The team Captain(s) may only inquire as to 
the application or interpretation of a rule. 
Note: REFEREES must at all time have full awareness of who the captains are.  
Note: the 1st REFEREE’S explanation, when required, should be clear and concise, use correct 
English Technical Terminology which may as appropriate be accompanied by hand signals. No 
further delays should be permitted and the players should be urged to immediately resume play. 
2. Team Captains have the right to formally protest about referees’ application or interpretation of the 
rules before, during or after a match. However, it is improper for the FIRST REFEREE to accept a 
Protest that involves playing actions or misconduct unless there is a challenge on possible 
misinterpretation of the Rules of the Game. Only the following three criteria must be considered in 
evaluating whether to accept a Protest as being valid or not and therefore capable of potential 
consideration: 
2.1 The REFEREE misinterpreted or did not correctly apply the rules / regulations, or did not assume 
the consequences of his/ her decisions. 
2.2 There is a scoring error (rotation or match score). 
2.3 A technical aspect of the match conditions (weather, light etc). 
Note: For FIVB, World and Official Competitions, REFEREES must be familiar with all aspects of the 
“Protest Protocol” (see page 34 to 38) especially the use of two Levels of protest during the match 
(Level 1 – resolved at the time of the protest; Level 2 – resolved after the match). 
3. The Captain must sign the score sheet and represent the team at the coin toss. 
 
 
--- Page 6 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 5 
 
 
6 .  P L A Y I N G  F O R M A T   
 
1. REFEREES must judge faults and apply penalties according to the Official Beach Volleyball Rules. 
2. If two or more faults are committed successively, only the first one is considered. For this reason, it is 
most important that REFEREES blow the whistle immediately upon seeing a fault. If both REFEREES 
blow their whistle to stop play, the first whistle will be considered. 
3. If two opponents commit two or more faults simultaneously, a double fault is committed and the rally 
is replayed. 
4. If there is any doubt about the order of faults, it is good officiating technique to quickly discuss or 
clarify information with your fellow officials. 
5. In Rally Point Scoring (RPS) sets one and two are played to 21 points, with a 2-point advantage 
needed. There is no cap. The third set, if needed, would be played to 15 points with a 2-point 
advantage, with no cap needed.  
6. A team that is declared in default will lose the match with a set score of 0-21, 0-21 and a 0-2 match 
result, (Rule 6.4.1, and 6.4.2). 
7. In RPS a point is gained from each rally or from a penalty (misconduct or delay).  
8. A team that is declared incomplete will retain any points gained or sets won with the opposing team 
being awarded the points needed to win the set and/or the match (Rule 6.4.3). 
Note: For FIVB, World and Official Competitions whenever the Pool Play format is implemented, Rule 
6.4 may be subject to modifications as stated in the Specific Competition Regulations issued by the 
FIVB in due time, establishing the modality to be followed for treating the default and incomplete team 
cases. 
 
7 .  S T R U C T U R E  O F  P L A Y   
 
1. The coin toss is conducted before the warm-up, and not before the SCORER has arrived courtside 
and is ready to record the results of the coin toss on the scoresheet. 
Note: After the coin toss the captain must sign the scoresheet to confirm the details recorded especially 
that the number (1 or 2) of the player matches the player’s name. They must also confirm their service 
order and side of the court as soon as possible. 
2. After the coin toss, the SECOND REFEREE must pass all relevant information to the SCORER. 
Note: The same applies in case he/ she is required to conduct the toss between sets 2 and 3 (Rule 
23.2.9). In this case, he/ she then must pass all relevant information also to the FIRST REFEREE. 
3. It is important that REFEREES keep to the total protocol time (esp. warm-up session), allocated to 
the teams so that the tournament is not prolonged during the day. This protocol should be confirmed at 
the Technical Meeting. REFEREES must be sure of this allocated time and ensure there are no delays. 
Note: REFEREES should closely study the Official Match Protocol (see pages 21 and 22), especially 
the total length of the protocol and key times within it for the match officials. 
4. It is important to follow the protocol to avoid confusion should a forfeit occur because of one team not 
being present at the court. A REFEREE should not assume a team will not be present based on a 
previous forfeit by the team. Be sure that the scoresheet is completed before allowing anyone to sign it. 
Notify the relevant FIVB Delegate(s) in the case of possible forfeit. (The coin toss should be conducted; 
the players present notified of the official warm up time beginning by blowing of the whistle and ending 
by blowing of the whistle. Then a whistle indicating teams to start the match. If at this time a team is 
incomplete the forfeit is given).   
Note: The FIRST REFEREE must follow the instructions of the relevant FIVB Delegate(s) especially in 
exceptional circumstances keeping all officials and players aware of situation. REFEREES at all times 
should follow the procedure as defined in the “Forfeit and Default Protocol” (see pages 23 to 25). 
5. A team can only play with two players, no more, no less. Therefore, there is no substitution or 
replacement of players (Rules 7.3.1, 15.2.2). 
6. Players may position themselves anywhere within their respective court. Therefore, there are no 
positional faults at the moment of the server’s hit. 
Note: The SECOND REFEREE may at the time of service be watching both teams in order to assist the 
FIRST REFEREE but they must do so in a way that ensures they still primarily watch the receiving 
team. 
7. If the incorrect player is found to have served, the team can only be penalized by loss of service (or 
points scored) if, prior to the service, it had been correctly notified by the scorer, SECOND REFEREE or 
FIRST REFEREE that it was incorrect in accordance with the service order.  
Note: If the correct procedure for notifying a wrong server has not taken place (e.g.: late notification or 
incorrect notification by the SCORER) the service order is merely corrected with the team(s) maintaining 
their points and a new service made. 
 
--- Page 7 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 6 
 
8 .  S T A T E S  O F  P L A Y  
 
1. The ball is in play from the moment the server contacts the ball after the whistle for service given by 
the first REFEREE. 
2. The ball is out of play the moment either REFEREE whistles. REFEREES must blow the whistle at 
the moment of the fault (e.g.: for "ball in" or "out"). 
3. REFEREES must remember that the ball mark could be completely outside the line, but the ball 
called "in" if the ball contacted the boundary line, which was slightly raised by a mound of sand (Rule 
8.3). 
Note: REFEREES must be aware that the line may move due to the ball landing near it. This should not 
influence the decision, which is based on actual contact with the line. 
Note: Team Captains have no right to insist that a REFEREE review a ball mark on the sand, and only 
where significant doubt exists as to whether the ball is in or out the FIRST REFEREE may decide to 
review a ball mark in strict compliance with the “Ball Mark Protocol” (see pages 26, 27 and 28). 
4. The ball is "out" when it completely crosses the lower space under the net, but this is signalled by the 
REFEREE pointing to the imaginary centre line. (Diagram 9/22). 
Note: it is the SECOND REFEREE’S responsibility to call the ball recovered completely on the 
opponent’s side under the net (Rule 23.3.2.6).  
 
9 .  P L A Y I N G  T H E  B A L L  
 
1. In a playing action (except the service), players have the right to play the ball beyond its own free 
zone and over the scoring table in its complete extension.  
Note: With the exception of Rule 10.1.2, this limits the players to retrieving the ball outside their own 
free zone and over the score table, including the part of the score table on the opponent side of the net.  
2. A team is entitled to a maximum of three hits for returning the ball over the net. If two players contact 
the ball simultaneously it is counted as two hits (except at blocking), and either player may contact the 
ball for the third hit. 
3. If simultaneous contacts by opponents occurs over the net 
and the ball remains in play, the team receiving the ball has 
three more hits. 
4. If the ball goes out after the simultaneous contact, the fault is 
charged to the team on the opposite side. If this simultaneous 
contact causes the ball to directly hit the antenna, there will be a 
replay. 
Note: This situation must be examined very carefully, as an 
extended simultaneous hit over the net is not a fault and after 
this hit, the ball may land outside the court or contact the 
antenna. 
5. If simultaneous contacts by opponents occurs over the net 
and both opponents make an extended contact with the ball, 
play can continue after this action. 
6. Within the playing area, a player is not permitted to take 
support from a team-mate or any other structure/object in order 
to reach the ball (Rule 9.1.3). 
7. The ball may be played with any part of the body (except 
when serving). 
8. The ball must be hit, not caught and/ or thrown. It can 
rebound in any direction. 
Exceptions: See Rules 9.2.2.1 and 9.2.2.2 
9. During the action of players setting overhand with fingers, the ball must be played with one quick 
motion. There must not be any significant movement of the ball downwards whilst in the hands and the 
ball may not visibly come to rest in the player's hands. 
Note: Technically in ALL hand setting actions the ball rests and also moves downward whilst in contact 
with the hands of the player. It is the quickness of this action that will determine if the "downwards 
motion" or the "length of the contact" is of visible significance, and consequently a fault. 
Note: There are various unique methods of setting and passing the ball in Beach Volleyball. A 
REFEREE must understand the nature of these ball contacts concentrating on their length (the 
emphasis quite correctly with the catch or thrown ball is the duration of the contact) and how technically 
correct or clean the contact was (the emphasis with the double contact is that this is not indicated by the 
spin of the ball but by the fact that a clear fault – time difference between the two hands that contact the 
ball – has occurred and that this is visible for the REFEREE).  

--- Page 8 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 7 
 
Note: REFEREES must find consistency of application around duration of contact and try to maintain 
uniform criteria in ball handling in general not only on a game basis but also from day to day and 
tournament to tournament. 
10. In defensive action of a hard driven attack, the ball contact 
can be extended momentarily overhand with the fingers. A 
good indication of a hard driven attack is the time in which the 
defensive player had to react to play the ball. If the defensive 
player had time to make a decision or to react by changing, 
their technique as to how to play the ball it was probably not a 
hard driven ball. However, referees must be 100% sure 
before they blow the whistle for a fault.  
Note: This may apply to the second touch of a team if the 
block contact was slight and the ball is still a hard driven 
attack, or to the defensive action (team first contact) after a 
ball has been blocked.  
Note: A hard driven ball by the offensive player may occur 
from a player standing on the ground. It is not necessary that 
they jump and spike the ball in all circumstances. REFEREES 
must be consistent in their application of the hard driven ball 
criteria clearly understanding the nature of the attack as it 
passes over the net, after it contacts a block or net etc. 
11. There may be consecutive contacts, provided it is one 
attempt to play the ball when it is the first contact by a team. 
The exception to this is the overhand finger action. 
Exception: Hard driven attack (Rule 9.2.2.1.)  
 
1 0 .  B A L L  A T  N E T  
 
1. The Rule 10.1.2 gives the right to play the ball from the opponent team’s free zone. The SECOND 
REFEREE and the LINEJUDGES must understand this rule well! During the match, they must 
recognize practically and make the appropriate movement to give space to the player who will replay 
the ball to his/her court! If the ball crosses the vertical plane of the net, within the crossing space, to the 
opponent's free zone and it is touched by the player attempting to return this ball back, the REFEREES 
must whistle the fault at the moment of the contact and show "out".  
Note: Outside the antennae is defined as passing completely outside or partly outside (i.e.: over) the 
antennae. A ball that passes between any of the ropes or cables that link the net with the post without 
touching any of them will be able to be legally continued in play i.e.: the gap between net and post is 
considered part of the external space. 
2. Play can continue after the ball is driven into the net provided it is within the limits of the three team 
hits and it contacts the net between the antennas without touching them. 
 
1 1 .  P L A Y E R  A T  T H E  N E T  
 
1. A player may enter the opponents' space, court, and/or 
free zone, provided that this does not interfere with the 
opponents' play (Rule 11.2). 
2. Interference under the net is primarily the SECOND 
REFEREE’S responsibility to judge. Contact by players is 
not always interference. If the contact is incidental and did 
not interfere with the players' ability to make a play on the 
ball there is no fault. 
3. However, interference may be penalised if the contact is 
not physical but merely threatened. The player may be in 
the path of the player making a play on the ball, thus 
causing the player to have to go around them to make a 
play on the ball. 
Note: Interference may be penalised if the player’s ability to 
play the next or subsequent hit is impeded. 
4. An interference fault may be penalised regardless of the player’s position on the playing court or in 
the free zone. The REFEREE may in some cases clearly see that the player has deliberately 
substantially altered his/ her position in order to interfere with the other player’s attempt to play the ball. 
This is a fault. 
 
  
  
--- Page 9 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 8 
 
5. We draw attention to the rule concerning the contact of the player with the net: “Contact with the net 
by a player between the antennae, during the action of playing the ball, is a fault. The action of 
playing the ball includes (amongst others) take-off, hit (or attempt) and landing.” 
6. Any player close to the ball as it is played, and who is him/herself trying to play it, is considered in the 
action of playing the ball, even if no contact is made with it. Attention should be paid to the following 
situations:  
a) If a player is in his/her playing position on his/her court and a ball is driven from the opposing side 
into the net and causes the net to touch the player (Rule 11.3.3), no fault is committed by the latter. 
b) Incidental contacts of the net with players caused by a significant alteration of its normal shape due to 
the wind must not be considered a fault and play should continue. 
c) Incidental contact of the hair with the net must not be considered a fault unless it is clear it affected 
the opponent’s ability to play the ball or interrupted the rally (e.g., a pony-tail gets tangled in the net). 
7. Where a player interferes with the opponent’s play, by: 
a) using the net between the antennae as a support or stabilizing aid,  
b) creating an unfair advantage over the opponent by touching the net,  
c) making actions which hinder an opponent’s legitimate attempt to play the ball,  
d) catching/holding on to the net then this will be whistled as: Net fault, if the action is a “net contact 
interference”, or Interference, if the action involves “interference through being in the opponent’s space 
and court”.  
8. REFEREES’ attention is drawn to the fact that the cables binding the net beyond the 8.00/ 8.50 m in 
length do not belong to the net. This also applies to the posts, as well as the portion of the net that is 
outside the antennas (in case of an 8.50 m net). Thus, if a player touches an external part of the net (top 
band outside the antennas, cables, poles, etc.), this shall not be considered as a fault, unless it 
interferes with the opponent’s play or it is used as a support for the player to hit the ball.   
9. A player who deliberately reaches towards and contacts the ball through the net when the ball is on 
the opponent’s side causing the opponents not to have a play on the ball will be penalised. Conversely, 
a ball hitting a player through the net when the player did not attempt to deliberately contact the ball 
would not be a penalty (e.g.: they had a potential play on the ball or were in an existing position). See 7. 
b) and c) above.  
Note: The first situation above is penalised as a net touch as the player is considered deliberately to 
have caused the net to touch them, not the ball causing the net to touch them. 
10. On account of the top quality of the teams participating, the game near the net is of fundamental 
importance and therefore, REFEREES must be particularly attentive, especially in cases where the ball 
rubs against the blockers’ hands. 
Note: This is equally important for plays when the ball after hitting the block is sent outside the court or 
plays when the ball after hitting the block keeps in play, as in this case it counts as the first hit of the 
team.   
11. In order to facilitate the collaborative work of the two REFEREES, the division of work shall be as 
follows: the FIRST REFEREE will – after assessing the attack/block contacts above the net – primarily 
(but not exclusively) concentrate on looking at the entire length of the net (top white band to bottom 
white band) on the attackers' side of the net, and the SECOND REFEREE will primarily (but not 
exclusively) concentrate on looking at the entire length of the blockers side of the net. 
 
1 2 .  S E R V I C E  
 
1. Once a team has determined its service order, it 
must be maintained throughout the individual set. The 
ASSISTANT SCORER must hold up a numbered 
paddle (1 or 2) to indicate the correct server. He/she 
should correct any incorrect server prior to the whistle 
for service and the service hit. Therefore, a service 
order fault should never occur unless a player insists 
on serving out of order. This is a service order fault 
and is penalised. 
Note: If the correct procedure for notifying a wrong 
server has not taken place (e.g.: late notification or 
incorrect notification by the SCORER) the service 
order is merely corrected with the team(s) maintaining 
their points and a new service made. 
Note: This procedure only applies if the wrong server is from the team that legally should serve. If the 
wrong team serves (either player), play must stop and be recommenced with no points scored. This will 
usually occur at the start of the set. 
 
--- Page 10 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 9 
 
2. The server does not have to start his/ her approach for service in the service zone. At the moment of 
the service hit or takeoff for a jump service, the server must not be in contact with either the court (the 
end boundary line included) or the ground outside the service zone. The server's foot may not go under 
the line. After the serve, they may step or land outside the service zone, or land inside the court. 
Note: It is not necessary for the server to be in the service zone for him/ her to receive the ball. It is not 
necessary for the server to be in the service zone when the FIRST REFEREE whistles for service – but 
common sense must prevail and the teams must be ready. 
Note: If the server moves to the service zone immediately after the end of the rally, and the time 
between the end of the previous rally and the whistle for the next service will not take more than 12 sec, 
then the referee may consent to the player’s eventual routine for service preparation if this is part of the 
12 sec between the rallies. However, if the server initiates any prior routine (i.e., wiping glasses, talking 
to partner, smoothing the sand, fixing lines, etc.) before he/ she starts walking to the service zone, then 
the referee must make sure that the server accepts the ball as soon as she/ she gets close to the 
service zone. Refusing the ball or ignoring the ball retriever in such cases, shall be immediately 
sanctioned as a delay. 
3. REFEREES must understand that a line 
may move because a player kicks / pushes the 
sand. Therefore, the line moving is not 
necessarily a fault.  
Note: The FIRST REFEREE should be 
conservative in the calling of a foot fault relying 
primarily on the LINEJUDGE signalling a fault. 
4. A player has only one service attempt, once 
the ball has been released, to initiate service 
(Rules 12.4.6, 12.4.7). 
Note: Many players will release the ball from 
their hand(s) before the actual toss for service. 
The FIRST REFEREE must clearly 
understand carefully the intention of the 
player. 
 
5. A service ball touching the net is not a fault. 
6. The first referee should pay attention to screening during the execution of the service.  
 
1 3 .  A T T A C K - H I T  
 
1. The open hand "dink or tip" to direct the ball to the opponent’s 
court with the fingers is a fault. The ball poked with fingertips or 
knuckles is allowed.  
Note: In case of fingertips contact the fingers that contact the 
ball must be together and rigid. 
Note: Caution must be taken when a player contacts the ball 
first with the fingers and then pushes the ball into the block 
causing a "catch" over the net. This first contact is a fault and 
should be penalised. If both teams contact the ball 
simultaneously, causing an extended ball contact (over the net), 
this is not a fault and play should be allowed to continue. 
2. An attack hit initiated at the attacker’s side is often finalized 
just beyond the net. Referees are advised that provided the ball 
is not caught or thrown and the contact is initiated on the 
attacker’s side, this should not be regarded as a fault.  
In addition, when two players contest the ball at the net, and the 
contact is extended, the final contact may, in practice, also be 
beyond the net plane (i.e., over the opposition court). Unless this 
becomes a second deliberate action, once again, this should not 
be penalised. 
3. An opponent may not complete an attack hit on a service, while the ball is completely above the height of 
the net. This is a fault. 
4. A player may complete an attack-hit using an overhand pass (which has a trajectory perpendicular to the 
line of the shoulders), either forwards or backwards. 
Note: The REFEREE should consider the line of the player’s shoulder at the initial stage of the contact with 
the ball. Players must establish their shoulder position before the contact is made. 
 
 
 
--- Page 11 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 10 
 
1 4 .  B L O C K  
 
1. Blocking is the action of players close to the net to intercept the ball coming from an opponent by 
reaching higher than the top of the net (Rule 14.1.1). The part of the player contacting the ball need not 
be above net height but the player must have some part of the body above net height for the contact to 
count as a block. 
2. The block contact is counted as a team hit. 
3. Any player, including the one who has touched the ball at the block, may execute the first hit after the 
block (R.14.4.2). This would be the second team contact because the block contact is counted as a 
team hit (R.14.4.1). 
Note: It is illegal to block a serve. 
 
1 5 .  I N T E R R U P T I O N S   
1. An interruption is the time between one completed rally and the first referee’s whistle for the next 
service, and the only regular game interruptions are time-outs.  
Note: During all regular interruptions (including Technical Time Outs) 
and set intervals, players must go to the designated players’ areas.   
2. Each team is entitled to a maximum of one timeout per set. The 
duration of the timeout is 30 seconds, which cannot be shortened. 
Note: The REFEREE commences the timing of the timeout from the 
time of the whistle accompanied by the signal for timeout.  
Note: The following steps should be followed under usual 
circumstances for the timing of Timeouts:  
 15 seconds to leave the court (start timing as above) 
 30 seconds timeout for the players at designated chairs 
 SECOND REFEREE to blow their whistle at 45 seconds and 
signal for the players to return to the court 
 SECOND REFEREE actively encourages the players to return to 
the court 
 15 seconds to return to the playing court and prepare to serve or 
for reception 
 Total elapsed time MUST not exceed 1 minute. 
3. Team Captains may request a timeout while the ball is out of play and before the whistle for service. 
Players must use the proper hand signal when requesting a timeout. If the Captain does not show the 
hand signal for a Timeout, either REFEREE will ignore their request and resume play immediately. 
4. The REFEREES shall NOT accept a timeout request from the non-captain. This is an improper 
request. It is to be rejected without sanction unless repeated. So, if it was not repeated, no delay 
warning or penalty applies.  
Note: However, there is no rule that says there cannot be a legitimate request from the captain during 
the same interruption. So, the REFEREES could accept a timeout request from the captain. 
5. It is not permitted to request any regular game interruption after having had a request rejected and sanctioned by a delay warning during the same interruption (i.e., before the end of next completed rally). 
Note: Improper requests that affect or delay the game shall be sanctioned for delay. REFEREES must 
study carefully the rule and understand what “improper request” means (see Rule 15.5).   
6. In sets one and two a technical timeout (TTO) will occur when the sum of the points is 21 points. 
Note: The ASSISTANT SCORER starts and ends the TTO with the use of the buzzer/ bell, with the 
teams then following the same procedure as for a time out. In case of no buzzer/ bell being available, 
the SECOND REFEREE starts and ends the timing of the timeout as per 15.2 above. 
Note: At the end of the TTO, as soon as the teams start walking back to the court, the SECOND 
REFEREE whistles and signals court switch.   
 
1 6 .  G A M E  D E L A Y S   
 
1. Examples of delaying the game are: 
(a) Prolonging the 12 seconds between rallies without authorisation; 
(b) Attempting to slow down the pace of the match; 
(c) Discussions with officials about decisions involving playing actions or misconduct; 
(d) Prolonged discussions by team Captains with officials about rules interpretation and/ or application, 
or declining to continue the match after the REFEREES have given their explanation;  
(e) Prolonging time outs or side switches; 
(f) Repeating improper requests in the same match; 
(g) Repeated requests to know the number of time outs used. 
 
 
--- Page 12 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 11 
 
Note: Many different delaying tactics are being used by players while attempting to slow down the pace 
of the match. REFEREES are required to carefully identify these while monitoring that a constant pace 
shall be implemented between rallies. REFEREES should be consistent in the application of warnings / 
penalization for similar types of delaying tactics. 
2. REFEREES must insist that players between rallies move directly to their position for service or 
reception. The time between rallies shall be 12 seconds. However, this may be extended to 15 seconds 
with the permission of the Technical Delegate in the case a situation of extreme weather conditions 
such as humidity or heat is officially declared. The time between rallies may be shortened if both teams 
are ready. 
Note: The FIRST REFEREE will only allow a delay between rallies when not allowing it would represent 
substantial hazard, danger or threat to the safety of the player or would decrease the image / 
presentation of the match. The 12 seconds rule particularly applies to players not delaying the time 
between rallies by altering lines, excessive communication to their partner, use of towels, wiping of 
glasses etc.  
Note: Players should generally proceed directly to serve, but if they wish to use a towel, wipe glasses, 
etc must do so immediately at the end of the rally so that they will start getting ready to serve/receive at 
around 8 seconds at the limit. 
Note: The FIRST REFEREE should initially, in the case of small delays between rallies, give verbal 
warnings (indicating teams to return to commence play), but a pattern of continued delays must be 
sanctioned. 
Note: A wipe/towel for the sunglasses cleaning shall be hanging on the poles/net rope on each side of 
the court (next to the FIRST and SECOND REFEREE), with one wipe/towel being dedicated to each 
team, so could be used quickly, if needed, to avoid any delays during the match. Team taking the bench 
on the left side of the scorer’s table, shall switch the court side next to the SECOND REFEREE and use 
the wipe/towel only if needed without any delay. Vice-versa with the other team who shall switch court 
on the side of the FIRST REFEREE. No sunglasses cleaning wipe/towel shall be provided by the Line 
Judges and/or Referees to the players. If a player approaches to the team bench or to a Ball Retriever 
for the sunglasses cleaning wipe/towel, the action shall be sanctioned as a delay. New clean 
wipe/towels shall be available for each match. 
3. REFEREES must reject any attempt from team Captains to discuss decisions involving playing 
actions or misconduct.  
Note: In case players insist, the FIRST REFEREE shall immediately sanction the team for delay.  
4. When explaining their interpretation and/ or application of a rule to a team Captain, REFEREES 
should be clear and concise, use correct English Technical Terminology which may as appropriate be 
accompanied by hand signals.  
Note: No further delays shall be permitted and the players shall be requested to continue the match 
immediately. In case they disagree with the explanation they have however the right to initiate a Protest 
Protocol, which they must do immediately. 
5. The first delay by a team member in the match is sanctioned with a Delay Warning. 
Note: before the start of any eventual following set(s), after the SCORER has completed the score 
sheet with the relevant information passed by the SECOND REFEREE, he/she must ensure that the 
SCORER then crosses off the WARN box at the DELAY SANCTIONS section for that team in that set. 
6. The second and subsequent delays of any type by any member of the same team in the match will be 
sanctioned with a Delay Penalty. 
Note: the SECOND REFEREE must inform the FIRST REFEREE in case a Delay Warning has been 
already issued to that team.  
7. Rule 15.4.4 states that the first improper request by a team in the match that does not affect or delay the game shall be rejected, but it must be recorded on the score sheet without any other consequences.  
Note: There is nothing in the rule statement about the previous events before the improper request. If a 
request is improper for the first time by a team, it should be considered as an “improper request”; it 
doesn’t matter, if previously the team received a delay sanction. So, after DW or DP, an “improper 
request” may still be committed – and recorded in the score sheet.  
 
1 7 .  E X C E P T I O N A L  G A M E  I N T E R R U P T I O N S  
 
1. Under rule 17.1 of the Official Beach Volleyball Rules, if a serious accident occurs during the rally and 
a player is bleeding or he/she may aggravate his/her condition if play continues, the Referee must blow 
the whistle immediately to stop play. The rally is then replayed. 
2. Upon a player becoming injured/ill, as soon as the rally is finished the 2nd referee must check if the 
player requires medical assistance.  
--- Page 13 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 12 
 
a) If the player is bleeding and the bleeding is minor and can be stopped easily, this must be 
treated with no delay, without any need for a “medical time out” to be implemented. If the 
bleeding is more significant it should be treated as requiring medical assistance. In this case, 
the 1st referee shall authorize a “medical time out”.  
(refer to “Medical Time Out” protocol (MTO), pages 30 and 31).  
b) In case the injury/illness involves no bleeding and is minor and can be easily resolved, this must 
be treated with no delay, without any need for a medical assistance to be involved. Yet if 
medical assistance is required, and the team has an available timeout, or the play that just 
finished lead to a technical time out or to the set interval, then treatment can be provided with 
no delay to the game. Otherwise, injuries/illness for any non-blood injury (including traumatic, 
non-traumatic, and non-contact injuries that are not blood related, illness in relation to severe 
weather conditions officially declared; or use of toilets, shall be treated as a “Recovery 
Interruption” and resolved with the minimum possible delay after initiated by the 1st referee, with 
the recovery time not taking longer than absolutely necessary (e.g., taping).  
(refer to “Recovery Interruption” protocol (RIT), pages 31 to 33). 
3. Referees should be aware of the circumstances leading up to the injury/illness as they are 
responsible to establish its nature and extent (if minor or significant). 
4. The injured/ill player has the right to choose the medical assistance from among the official medical 
personnel assigned on site, or from the properly accredited team’s medical personnel.  
5. Under all circumstances above, the official medical personnel shall be requested to come to the court 
as it will be their responsibility to supervise the treatment and report to the 1st referee when this has 
been completed, unless the player declares her/himself ready to resume play before their arrival at the 
court area. A “MTO” or a “RIT” as applicable shall be in any case assigned to that player. 
6. When treatment has been completed or if no treatment can be provided in that short time period, play 
must resume or the relevant team is declared incomplete for the set 
or the match, as applicable. 
7. Unless for bleeding cases (refer to “Medical Time Out” protocol 
(MTO) at pages 30 and 31), the decision whether a player is 
medically fit or not to resume after an injury/illness depends entirely 
upon the player.  Even if the official medical personnel advise the 
player not to continue, the final decision of whether to resume or not 
rests with the player. This condition is covered in the signed 
"Players Commitment". However, in extreme cases, the doctor of 
the competition can oppose the return of an injured/ill player. 
8. In the first case above, the referees shall record at the “remarks 
section” of the score sheet that the player specifically requested to 
continue the match against medical advice from the official medical 
personnel. The relevant post-match signature by the captain will 
verify this statement. 
9. The duration of the medical assistance shall be electronically 
timed from the moment the scorer hits the relevant button at the e-
scoresheet, with the timer being displayed at the litescore. The 
timing shall start from the whistle of the 1st referee after he/she 
initiates the “MTO” or the “RIT”, ending when the litescore buzzer 
signals the end of the maximum authorized 5 minutes, or at the whistle of the 1st referee immediately 
after treatment is declared complete by the official medical personnel, or if no treatment can be 
provided, or when the player declares that he/she is ready to resume play.  
Note: In case no e-scoresheet being applied, the medical assistance shall be manually timed by the 
official scorer. 
10. It is possible for the same player to undergo “Medical Time Out” with “Recovery Interruption” in the 
same match. (refer to “Medical Assistance” protocols, pages 29 to 33).  
11. Medical assistance may in any case be provided to players at regular game interruptions (TO, TTO, 
set intervals) with no delay to the game. 
12. In the case a player delays the normal sequence of the game while using the toilets, a “Recovery 
Interruption” will be assigned to that player with the match resuming as soon as the player is back to the 
court.  
Note: Organizers are required to supply 2 dedicated athletes’ toilets (one for the women and one for the 
men) - portable if it is not possible to use an existing facility - within a range of maximum 100 metres 
from any of the competition courts. Referees are required to report this aspect at their homologation 
court checking prior to the start of the tournament. 
 
--- Page 14 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 13 
 
13. To be able to provide quick treatment during matches, medical personnel must be seated in the 
immediate courtside area during matches.  
Note: Official medical personnel (first aid, physician and physical therapist) are required at courtside 
area at all court locations, allowing quick and qualified response to athlete’s medical assistance during 
the games.  
14. For any cases of injury forfeit related with “severe weather conditions” or “use of toilets”, the 1st 
referee will try to establish if this is due to heat exhaustion and/or dehydration. If this is the case, the 
injured/ill player shall be asked “Have you suffered from vomiting and/or diarrhea during the past five 
days?” This information is then reported to the Referee Coach for the relevant purposes (BVB-45 Heat 
Stress Monitoring Results). 
15. Any time a forfeit due to injury/illness occurs, including before the match starts, official medical 
personnel and the FIVB Medical Delegate (if one is appointed to the event) must be present. 
16. In the case of an athlete being assigned a “Recovery Interruption” or forfeiting a match due to an 
alleged injury/illness, immediately following the relevant score sheet administration he/she will be given 
a copy of the BVB/49 form by the match referees. The follow up of the concerned procedure is the 
responsibility of the injured/ill player. (refer to FIVB Beach Volleyball Sport Operations Manual)).  
Note: At FIVB World and Official Competitions, a maximum of two “Recovery Interruption” due to non-
traumatic, and non-contact injuries that are not blood related, illness in relation to severe weather 
conditions officially declared; or use of toilets, are allowed per athlete within a rolling 12-month period. 
(refer to FIVB Beach Volleyball Sport Operations Manual)). 
17. The FIVB Technical Delegate, with basis on the WBGT index and in consultation with the Official 
Medical Doctor of the tournament or the FIVB Medical Delegate (if present) and the FIVB Referee 
Coach may apply exceptional measures such as:  
• To increase the time between rallies from 12 sec to 15 sec; and if necessary 
• To permit quick water breaks at the side changes 
• To assign an extra technical time-out when the sum of points scored by the teams equals 42 points 
When any of the measures above is applied, the tournament is officially considered under severe 
weather conditions.  
Note: Only when a tournament is officially declared under Severe Weather conditions, the 1st referee 
may authorize “Recovery Interruption” due to an athlete suspected illness in relation to severe weather 
conditions. 
18. The FIVB Technical Delegate in consultation with the Organizing Committee can also decide 
interrupting a match/ tournament if temperatures, light or weather conditions present a danger to players 
or do not enable normal playing conditions to be maintained. 
19. The 1st referee has the responsibility to judge all areas of external interference including members 
of the auxiliary corps, spectators and other objects / persons (Rules 17.2.and 17.3). 
 
1 8 .  I N T E R V A L S  A N D  C O U R T  S W I T C H E S   
 
1. In RPS, after every 7 points played, the teams switch courts immediately (5 points in set 3). If the 
teams fail to switch at a multiple of 7 (5 in set 3), they must switch at the earliest possible moment when 
the ball is out of play. There is no fault or deduction of points and play continues as if the teams 
switched at the correct time.  
Note: The points are recorded on the scoresheet in the Court Switch Box as the actual score, even 
though it is not a multiple of 7 (or 5 in set 3). 
2. An interval is the time between sets.  
Note: During set intervals, players must go to the designated player’s areas. 
3. There is no interval during switch of courts. Teams must switch courts immediately but not before 
being whistled for court switch by the REFEREE.  
Note: In case the REFEREE purposely pauses before whistling for the court switch and a player 
switches court before the whistle, his/ her team will be sanctioned for delay. However, REFEREES must 
maintain a constant pace between rallies, and also at side switches. 
4. Intervals last 1 minute. During the interval between the second and the deciding set the FIRST 
REFEREE, carries out a new coin toss (Rule 7.1).  
Note: In the interval between sets 1 and 2 the FIRST REFEREE should stay on the REFEREES chair. 
5. If applicable, the SECOND REFEREE can conduct the toss between sets 2 and 3 (Rule 23.2.9). 
 
 
 
--- Page 15 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 14 
 
 
1 9 .  R E Q U I R E M E N T S  O F  C O N D U C T   
 
1. It is the responsibility of the participants to know the official Beach Volleyball rules and abide by them. 
2. Participants must refrain from actions or attitudes aimed at influencing the decisions of the 
REFEREES or covering up faults committed by their team (Rule 19.1.3).   
Note: This includes intentionally covering up a ball mark in the sand after REFEREES have blown the 
whistle to stop the game (see 8.4.4). Also, in case a player “calls a fault” during play, thus trying to 
influence the REFEREES, the player shall be subject to the appropriate warning / sanction, depending 
on the circumstances. 
3. REFEREES are not policemen but conductors of the match. Normal reactions and emotional 
responses to decisions do not necessarily show disrespect to the officials' decisions. REFEREES must 
judge these emotional responses in the context of maintaining an appropriate level of demeanour, 
presentation of the match (spectator’s appeal of the game) and equity in penalties applied. It is 
nevertheless also very import to remember that according to Rule 19.2 participants must behave 
respectfully and courteously not only towards the referees, but also towards other officials, their 
teammate, the opponents and spectators. 
Note: REFEREES must penalise more actively cases of misconduct that are clearly not normal 
acceptable communications between an official and a player. This would include gestures, tone of 
voice, abuse of equipment (esp. ball and net) and protracted discussions with officials. If required, 
REFEREES are empowered to utilise the penalisation of Rude Conduct (red card) without prior warning.  
Note: Cases of players excessively abusing match equipment are considered Rude Conduct. 
Note: For FIVB, World and Official Competitions, a sanction fee is applied whenever, equipment abuse 
or officials and on court personnel abuse by players leads to a penalty or higher sanction by the referee.  
Please refer to the “FIVB misconduct sanction fee scale – implementation guidelines”. 
 
2 0 .  M I S C O N D U C T  A N D  I T S  S A N C T I O N S  
 
1. It is important that REFEREES understand the misconduct sanction scale and apply the rules 
correctly (Rule 20). This is especially important in RPS as misconduct or delay penalties may lead to 
complex applications of the rules and their resultant effect on the score sheet.  
2. Rule 20.1 deals with “minor misconduct” which is not subject to 
sanctions. It is the FIRST REFEREE’s duty to prevent the teams 
from approaching the sanctioning level, which can be done in two 
stages: The first stage by issuing a verbal warning through the team 
captain (either for individual or collective reaction). No cards, no 
registration on the score sheet. The second stage by a Formal 
Warning through the use of a yellow card shown to the relevant 
player (could be again for a collective reaction and in this case the 
card should be shown to the captain). This Formal Warning is not a 
sanction but a symbol that the team member (and by extension the 
team) has reached the sanctioning level for the match. It has no 
immediate consequences, but is recorded on the score sheet.    
Note: If for any reason the FIRST REFEREE would have gone 
directly to the sanctioning level (i.e.: a player being penalized for rude 
conduct due to having crossed the net to review a ball mark) then 
that team would have reached the sanctioning level for the rest of the match. Accordingly, after a 
Formal Warning or any misconduct sanction being recorded on the score sheet, the SECOND 
REFEREE must ensure that the SCORER then crosses off any “Formal Warn” box(s) left open for that 
team in that set. The same procedure applies before the start of other eventual sets that may follow. 
3. Rule 20.2 deals with “misconduct leading to sanctions”. According to this rule, rude, offensive and 
aggressive behavior is seriously sanctioned. They are applied and recorded on the score sheet 
according to a scale.  
4. Misconduct sanctions are cumulative only within an individual set. A player may however receive up 
to two red cards for rude conduct in an individual set (Rule 20.3.1).  
Note: Rude conduct, Offensive conduct and Aggression do not require prior sanction. 
Note: It is very important that respectively the SCORER and the REFEREES accurately record and 
follow the sequence of any minor misconduct which occurred in the match and any misconduct 
sanctions occurred in the set, in order to duly enforce the respective consequences in case of repetition 
respectively in the same match or set (see points 2 to 4 above).  
Note: In order to deliver a sanction, the offending player should be called to the FIRST REFEREE’S 
stand.  
 
--- Page 16 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 15 
 
5. A player who crosses the net to review a ball mark shall be penalized by the FIRST REFEREE for 
“Rude conduct”. 
Note: REFEREES must also pay particular attention to deliberate kicking of a ball at the completion of a 
rally. REFEREES must clearly distinguish between the various offences (and appropriately sanction,) 
taking into account circumstances such as intent, degree of premeditation and strength of players’ 
action. 
 
2 1 .  R E F E R E E I N G  T E A M  A N D  P R O C E D U R E S  
 
1. It is very important that the REFEREES signal the 
end of a rally only if the following two conditions are 
fulfilled: 
1.1. They are sure that a fault has been committed or 
there is an external interference; and 
1.2. They have identified its nature. 
2. To inform the teams exactly of the nature of the fault 
whistled by the REFEREES (for the public, TV 
viewers, etc.), the REFEREES must use the official 
hand signals (see Rules 21.2 and 29.1). Only these 
hand signals and no others (national or private hand 
signals or manner of execution) can be used! 
3. According to the Rules of the Game, the first fault to 
occur must be penalised. The fact that the FIRST and the SECOND REFEREES have different areas of 
responsibility makes it very important that each REFEREE whistles the fault immediately. On the whistle 
of one of the REFEREES, the rally ends (see Rule 8.2 – Ball out of play). After a whistle by the FIRST 
REFEREE, the SECOND REFEREE has no further right to blow his/her whistle, because the rally ends 
with the first whistle of the REFEREES. If the two REFEREES blow their whistles one after the other – 
for different faults – they cause confusion for the players, public, etc.  
4. Due to the speeding up of the game, problems may arise showing refereeing errors. To prevent this, 
the Refereeing team must collaborate very closely; after each playing action, they should glance at one 
another to confirm their decision. Good communication and co-operation between REFEREES is vital. A 
good team is constantly communicating and showing support for each other's decision. This attitude 
builds confidence in the officiating team and promotes a truly professional performance. 
 
2 2 .  F I R S T  R E F E R E E  
 
1. REFEREES must always cooperate with their fellow officials. They should allow them work within 
their area of responsibility and respect their decisions. However, if they feel that an official is in error, 
they have the authority to correct the call. If an official cannot perform to the required level, the FIRST 
REFEREE has the authority to replace this official. 
2. Many problems can be prevented by good communication with all officials before and during the 
match. 
Note: This especially applies to the ball mark protocol, protests and four hits.  
Note: This additionally applies when the match officials are unsure of the abilities of their auxiliary 
corps. 
3. It is important for REFEREES to have all their equipment to conduct the match: 
a) Personal set of red and yellow cards 
Note: REFEREES must remember that not all tournaments provide a set of cards on all courts attached 
to the post in front of the FIRST REFEREE’S chair. 
b) Coin to conduct the coin toss 
c) Whistle 
Note: It is a good idea for both REFEREES to have always an extra one. 
d) A watch that displays seconds and that it is set to the correct time. 
4. REFEREES must be in excellent physical and mental health. REFEREES should prepare themselves 
to be ready to officiate and rest, take food / liquids when appropriate during the days play. 
5. REFEREES must take responsibility for their decisions and the decisions of their fellow officials. 
Note: FIRST REFEREES can ask fellow officials to repeat their signals or to explain their decisions. 
6. The FIRST REFEREE must accept protests (if requested correctly under the rules / regulations). 
Note: For FIVB, World and Official Competitions, the FIRST REFEREE must carefully implement the 
“FIVB Protest Protocol” especially noting the FIRST REFEREE’s duties prior to the commencement of a 
Protest Protocol (see Protest Protocol pages 34 to 38). 
 
 
--- Page 17 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 16 
 
 
7. The FIRST REFEREE must control the conduct 
/ actions of all match officials after the completion 
of the match, ensuring a smooth transition to the 
next match with a minimum of interaction with all 
participants. 
8. For FIVB, World and Official Competitions 
(mandatory at the Centre Court for the FIVB World 
Championships and recommended at Volleyball 
World Beach Pro Tour Elite and Pro Tour Finals) 
the FIRST REFEREE is provided with a wireless 
lapel microphone equipped with a switch on/ off 
button allowing him/ her to clarify for the 
spectators their decisions. The aim is to clarify the 
implementation of the Rules of the Game and 
allow the audience to better understand and 
identify any controversial or relevant decisions. 
For further guidance, please refer to the “First 
Referee Verbal Communication with the Audience 
Protocol” (see pages 39 to 42). 
 
9. In cases where matches are to be televised / filmed, all match officials must interact with the 
appropriate TV / film staff especially concentrating on complying with FIVB regulations and the replay 
protocol. 
Note: For FIVB, World and Official Competitions, the host broadcaster can ask for a ‘replay delay’, if the 
necessary installations are made and agreed by the Organising Committee and the relevant FIVB 
Delegates. The necessary installation consists either of an earpiece or a floor manager linking the 
FIRST REFEREE to the host broadcaster representative, signalling for an instant replay of a previous 
action. At the voice “TV stop” or the “red paddle”, the FIRST REFEREE holds the start of the next rally 
by extending his/her arm on the side of the receiving team with the palm of the hand facing forward and 
the fingers pointing upwards. At the voice “TV go” or the “green paddle”, the FIRST REFEREE 
immediately dismisses the previous signal and initiates the signal and whistle for service.      
 
2 3 .  S E C O N D  R E F E R E E  
 
1. SECOND REFEREES must be of the same competence as the FIRST REFEREE. If for some reason 
the FIRST REFEREE is unable to continue working, the SECOND REFEREE may have to take their 
place as FIRST REFEREE. 
2. Good communication and cooperation with the FIRST REFEREE is mandatory. If for some reason, 
the SECOND REFEREE disagrees with the FIRST REFEREE’s decision they must not show this to the 
players and spectators but must continue officiating and show support for the FIRST REFEREE’S 
decision. 
Note: The positional work of the SECOND REFEREE is important 
in being able to communicate / collaborate with the FIRST 
REFEREE. 
3. The SECOND REFEREE is responsible for having the same 
equipment as the FIRST REFEREE (even the personal set of red 
and yellow cards). As SECOND REFEREE, they do not have the 
authority to sanction players, but if for some reason they have to 
take over the duties of the FIRST REFEREE, they must be 
prepared with all necessary personal equipment. 
Note: Relevance to carrying a coin to conduct the coin toss in case 
applicable.   
4. The SECOND REFEREE should supervise the work of the 
SCORERS, making sure that they have completed their work 
before allowing play to commence. Again, good communication is 
essential between these officials. 
Note: At all times the SECOND REFEREE is expected to know the correct score. There are several 
different techniques that can be utilized in RPS for the score to be kept by the SECOND REFEREE. 
5. During the exchange of play near the net, the SECOND REFEREE must concentrate on controlling 
the illegal touch of the whole net primarily (but not exclusively) on the blocker’s side, with the antenna 
on his/her side of the court, and the illegal penetrations under the net. 
Note: Attention must be paid to the change of the rule concerning the touch of the net by a player.  
 
--- Page 18 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 17 
 
6. The SECOND REFEREE’s duties and rights are clearly stipulated and REFEREES should study well 
the "responsibilities" of the SECOND REFEREE. We draw attention to the new duties that have added 
to the work of the SECOND REFEREE, with emphasis to being responsible for:  
6.1. Checking the height of the net before the coin toss; 
6.2. The five (5) match balls before, during and after the match, including coordinating the process of 
replacement of the five (5) match balls between sets in case the match balls get excessively heavy due 
to rainy conditions; 
6.3. Monitoring that water is always available for the players throughout the match. 
7. Concerning new responsibilities, the SECOND REFEREE must also "decide, whistle and signal the 
faults" during the match (See Rule 23.3.2): 
7.1. The contact of the ball with the sand when the FIRST REFEREE is not in position to see the 
contact; 
7.2. The ball recovered completely on the opponent’s side under the net; 
7.3. Conduct the toss between sets 2 and 3, if applicable. He/she then must pass all relevant 
information to the SCORER (Rule 23.2.9) and the FIRST REFEREE; 
7.4. Check and sign the score sheet at the end of the match. 
 
2 4 .  C H A L L E N G E  R E F E R E E   
 
1. For FIVB, World and Official Competitions, a CHALLENGE REFEREE will be assigned anytime the 
Video Challenge System (VCS) is in use; 
2. Depending on the set-up of the VCS, an ASSISTANT CHALLENGE REFEREE maybe required to 
assist facilitating the operations;  
3. The CHALLENGE REFEREE shall wear an official referee uniform while performing functions; 4. The CHALLENGE REFEREE shall review the challenge remarks and sign the scoresheet at the end of the match.  
 
2 5 .  R E S E R V E  R E F E R E E   
 
1. For FIVB, World and Official Competitions, a RESERVE REFEREE will be assigned for all TV 
matches, and anytime the Video Challenge System (VCS) is in use. The RESERVE REFEREE replaces 
the SECOND REFEREE in case of absence or in case that he/she is unable to continue his/her work or 
in case that the SECOND REFEREE became FIRST REFEREE.  
2. In addition to the above, the following duties originally assigned to the SECOND REFEREE, are 
carried out by the RESERVE REFEREE: 
2.1. Assist the SECOND REFEREE in keeping the free zone, including check before the match and 
monitor throughout the match, that water is always available for the players and the match OFFICIALS; 
2.2. Take possession of the five (5) match balls before the match, and check that all of them have 
identical characteristics (colour, circumference, weight and pressure) and then monitoring them 
throughout the match, and when required and applicable assisting collecting the balls from the court or 
returning the balls to the court through the SECOND REFEREE;  
2.3. Take possession of a reserve set of five (5) balls that must be available in case of rainy conditions. 
In case the match balls get excessively heavy, the RESERVE REFEREE is responsible to coordinate 
the process of replacement of the five (5) match balls between sets; 
2.4. Accompany any player that requests to use the toilet before or during the match; 
2.5. Assist the SECOND REFEREE in calling any Official that may be required on the court (Court 
Manager; Official medical personnel; FIVB Medical Delegate; FIVB Referee Coach; FIVB Technical 
Delegate, etc); 
2.6. Assist the SECOND REFEREE monitoring the safety conditions of the free zone during the match; 
2.7. Assist the FIRST REFEREE with guiding the work of the sand levellers;   
2.8. In case the Video Challenge System (VCS) is in use, his/her primary responsibility is to supervise 
the SCORER in filling in the Challenge System process at the e-scoresheet. 
 
2 6 .  S C O R E R   
 
1. The SCORER is expected to be near the playing court at least fifteen minutes before the scheduled 
start of the match. The first and second REFEREES will meet with them at this time. 
Note: For FIVB, World and Official Competitions a random alcohol test will apply. In case being 
selected the SCORER must be present at the alcohol test room, in uniform, 45 minutes before the 
match start time.  
2. The work of the SCORER is very important, particularly during international matches, where the 
members of the refereeing corps and of the teams are from different countries. They must work closely 
--- Page 19 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 18 
 
with the SECOND REFEREE, and if for some reason the SCORER is not ready to commence, they 
must make sure, the SECOND REFEREE is immediately informed of this. The SECOND REFEREE 
should not allow play to start until the scorer has finished their work. 
Note: Before a set being initiated; after a TO or a TTO; after an exceptional game interruption; and 
anytime they have requested extra time to complete their work, the SCORER should raise both hands 
and inform his/her readiness, which will be then communicated by the SECOND REFEREE to the 
FIRST REFEREE by the use of the same signal. 
3. The SCORER should inform the SECOND REFEREE if they need signatures or any other 
information for the scoresheet that has not yet been specially provided. 
Note: Rally Point Scoring places a lot of pressure on scorers to complete their recording of each rally 
and resultant points. If for any reason the SCORER falls behind in their scoring, they should 
immediately inform the referees. 
Note: This applies before the match regarding the serving team, service order and court side, and at the 
end of the match for the captain’s post-match signatures. 
4. New misconduct and delay sanction scales will be implemented from 2013 and onwards. It is very 
important that the SCORERS are fully aware of these new rules and its implications in the procedures 
for filling in the score sheet. (refer to the “FIVB Score sheet Instructions”).  
Note: the SCORER must remind the SECOND REFEREE any time: 
 a team has exhausted their first and only “Formal Warning” in the match;   
 a given player has been sanctioned already once, or twice, for “Rude conduct” in that same set;  
 a given player has been sanctioned already once for “Offensive conduct” in that same match;  
 a “Delay warning” has been already issued to that team in the match.  
5. Pool play system also places a lot of pressure on SCORERS to complete their recordings of final 
results at the scoresheet, as one single added or subtracted point at a given match in the pool will have 
an effect on the points ratio which can change the standings of the teams in the pool jeopardizing their 
chances to qualify for the next round of the tournament.  
Note: SCORERS must very carefully check all relevant boxes/sections of the scoresheet (e.g.: service 
order boxes; team points row) while filling out the Results box. For further guidance on how to fill in the 
scoresheet, please refer to the “FIVB Scoresheet Instructions” (FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing 
Coach’s Manual - Appendix 2).  
 
2 7 .  A S S I S T A N T  S C O R E R   
 
1. The ASSISTANT SCORER is expected to be near the playing court at least fifteen minutes before the 
scheduled start of the match. The first and second REFEREES will meet with them at this time. 
Note: For FIVB, World and Official Competitions a random alcohol test will apply. In case being 
selected the ASSISTANT SCORER must be present at the alcohol test room, in uniform, 45 minutes 
before the match start time. 
2. The ASSISTANT SCORER must be of the same competence as the SCORER and work in close 
coordination with him/her. If for some reason the scorer is unable to continue working, he/she will take 
over the respective functions.  
3. The ASSISTANT SCORER sits beside the SCORER, being responsible for the following duties: 
a) operates the manual scoreboard on the SCORER’s table, checking that all scoreboards at the 
stadium show the correct results to the audience and, if not, corrects it; 
b) operates the number paddles 1 and 2 for indicating the correct server in coordination with the 
SCORER. He/she must every time follow the verbal information received from the SCORER;  
Note: He/she should continue to hold the paddle up until the service takes place. 
Note: It is of good technique that the ASSISTANT SCORER follows an individual control sheet that 
he/she every time checks against the information received from the SCORER. 
c) starts and ends the timing of the Technical Time Outs with the use of the buzzer/bell, in case 
applicable. He/she can be replaced by the SECOND REFEREE in this action if no buzzer/bell is 
available. 
d) fills in the “BVB-51” (BMP version) for recording the number of unsuccessful BMP requests by a 
given the team, informing the SECOND REFEREE when a team has no more BMP requests for the set. 
4. If the wrong server is moving towards the service zone or is in possession of the ball to serve, the 
ASSISTANT SCORER must inform the SECOND REFEREE and player(s) to correct the error. 
5. If the wrong server contacts the ball, the ASSISTANT SCORER should sound a buzzer / bell (or other 
equipment supplied) to indicate a serving order fault has occurred. 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 20 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 19 
 
2 8 .  L I N E J U D G E S  
  
       1. For FIVB, World and Official Competitions matches, only two LINEJUDGES shall be used. 
2. LINEJUDGES, where possible, are expected to be near the 
playing court at least fifteen minutes before the scheduled start of 
the match. The FIRST and SECOND REFEREES will meet with 
them at this time. 
Note: For FIVB, World and Official Competitions a random alcohol 
test will apply. In case of being selected the LINEJUDGES must 
be present at the alcohol test room, in uniform, 45 minutes before 
the match start time. 
3. The organisers must provide each LINEJUDGE with uniform 
and flag.  The colour of the flags should be red or yellow. 
4. When two line judges are used, they stand at the corners of the court closest to the right hand of each referee, diagonally at 1 to 2 m from the corner. Each one of them controls both the end line and side line on his/her side. 
5. The LINEJUDGE’s work is very important, especially during 
high level international matches. In addition to calling “ball in” or “out”, as well as the other faults which 
they are responsible for, LINEJUDGES must pay close attention to the touch by the block, because this 
counts as a first team hit. LINEJUDGES must always indicate to the REFEREES by the use of a flag 
signal a block touch during the rally (for a possible four hit fault). 
6. Faults should be signalled clearly, to ensure beyond any doubt that the FIRST REFEREE sees them.  
7. If the ball touches the antenna, crosses over it, or flies outside it into the opponent’s court, the 
LINEJUDGE with the better view of the trajectory of the ball (primarily on the side of the playing court 
receiving the ball), must signal the fault.  
8. For any contact with the top 80cm of the antenna by any player during his/her action of playing the 
ball or interfering with the play, the LINEJUDGE nearer the side line on that side of the playing court 
where the player commits the fault must signal. 
9. The LINEJUDGE must understand clearly the definition of the ball out (i.e., when passing completely 
outside or over the antennae to the opponent court) and understand its various consequences in their 
signalling (when to signal, appropriate signal for each circumstance, etc). There are many different 
circumstances that may occur. 
10.  A LINEJUDGE may be asked to participate in a ball mark protocol for the line(s) he/she controls. 
The LINEJUDGE must indicate correctly the ball mark in the sand and any other facts as requested by 
the REFEREES. 
11.  At the time of service the LINEJUDGE on the side of the serving team positions himself/herself in 
line with the end line, and then as the server hits the ball, quickly moves in line with the respective side 
line (and antenna). The LINEJUDGE on the side of the receiving team stands at 45% degrees to the 
court until he/she is able to establish the trajectory of the ball, and then moves in line with the relevant 
line.  For the aspect of any eventual fault by the server stepping outsider the extension of the side line, 
the 1st and 2nd referees are in charge of watching their respective sides. 
Note: For the case where a server on the opposite side of the court is serving close to the extension of 
the side line, he/she is in charge of, the LINEJUDGE should help the relevant referee by position 
himself/herself in line with the relevant side line while the service is being executed. 
 
2 9 .  O F F I C I A L  S I G N A L S  
 
1. It is mandatory that Officials use the official signals 
according to the correct application of the rules and 
following diagrams 9 and 10 (respectively 1-25; and 1-5). 
Note: The use of any other signals should be avoided, but 
in any case, they should be used only when it is 
absolutely necessary to be understood by the team 
members. 
2. Where no other official hand signal can clearly be used, 
REFEREES may point to the object to clarify the decision. 
For example, foot faults, serving outside the extension of 
the sideliner and assisted hit. 
3. Officials must be clear and precise in the administration 
of the sequence of whistle and hand signals. Signals are 
separate and should follow the same order each time they 

--- Page 21 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 20 
 
are made.  
4. The exception to 2. above is the authorisation for service as the FIRST REFEREE whistles and 
shows the signal simultaneously. 
5. In the case of the FIRST REFEREE making the call, after the whistle he/she must then indicate in 
order: 
a) The team to serve, 
b) The nature of the fault by using the official hand signal, 
c) The player(s) at fault (if necessary). 
Note: The SECOND REFEREE will not follow the FIRST REFEREE’s hand signals.  
6. In the case of the SECOND REFEREE making the call, after the whistle he/she must then indicate: 
a) The nature of the fault by the official hand signal on the side where the fault was committed,  
b) The player at fault (if necessary), 
c) The team to serve following the hand signal of the FIRST REFEREE. 
Note: In this case, the FIRST REFEREE does not show either the nature of the fault or the player at 
fault, but only the team to serve.  
Note: When the SECOND REFEREE whistles for a fault (e.g., touch of the net by a player) he/she must 
be careful to show the hand signal on the side where the fault was committed (Rule 29.1). For example: 
if a player from the team that is on his/her right has touched the net, and he/she whistles this fault, the 
hand signals should not be shown through the net from the other team’s side, but the REFEREE should 
move, so that the hand signal is indicated on the side of the fault. 
Note: When the SECOND REFEREE signals for switch, there is no “mirror” by the FIRST REFEREE. 
However, if the SECOND REFEREE misses whistling and signalling for switch, then the FIRST 
REFEREE can do it. In this case the no “mirror” instruction as it relates to the SECOND REFEREE 
applies. 
Note: TO, and TTO shall be whistled and signalled by the SECOND REFEREE. No “mirror” by the 
FIRST REFEREE applies. However, if the SECOND REFEREE misses whistling and signalling for TO, 
the same principle as above will apply. The end of set and the end of match shall be whistled and 
signalled by the FIRST REFEREE. No “mirror” by the SECOND REFEREE applies. 
Note: The SECOND REFEREE retains the ability to assist the FIRST REFEREE with against-the-chest 
mid-rally or end-of-rally signalling. 
7. In the case of a “Replayed rally/ Double fault” 
While both REFEREES may whistle this incident and indicate by signal the replay (e.g., ball rolling on to 
court, player injured during a rally, etc.), it normally remains the FIRST REFEREE task to indicate the 
side to serve. The SECOND REFEREE will only copy the FIRST REFEREE signal for the team to serve 
next if he/ she actually whistled the stoppage in play.  
8. In the case both REFEREES whistle at the same moment to stop play but for different things 
Here each REFEREE will indicate the nature of the fault – but this time because the FIRST REFEREE 
must decide which course of action to follow after this, ONLY the FIRST REFEREE will indicate the 
“double fault” signal and indicate team to serve next. 
Note: For cases where the service is executed before the whistle, only the FIRST REFEREE signals 
replay followed by the team to serve next.  
9. The REFEREES and LINEJUDGES should pay attention to the correct application and use of the 
hand/flag signal: 
a) For all balls that land “directly out” after an attack or a block by the opposing team, the hand/flag 
signal of “ball out” (number 15 / LJ 2) must be used. 
b) If a ball from an attack hit crosses the net and touches the ground outside the playing court, but a 
blocker or other player of the receiving team touches it, the officials must show only the signal/flag 
signal “ball touched” (number 24 / LJ 3) 
c) If a ball, after a team has played it with the first, second or third touch, is out on its side, the officials 
must use the “ball touched” hand/flag signal (number 24 / LJ 3) 
d) If after an attack hit the ball is smashed into the top of the net and after that it lands “out” on the 
attacker’s side without touching the opponent’s block, the REFEREES must show “ball out” (number 15) 
but immediately after it the attacking player must be indicated (so that everybody understands that the 
ball was not touched by the blockers). If, in the same case, the ball touches the block and afterwards 
flies out on the attacker’s side, the FIRST REFEREE must show the hand signal “ball out” (number 15) 
and indicate the blocker(s).  
Note: The LINEJUDGE’s flag signals are also very important from the point of view of the participants 
and public. The FIRST REFEREE must check that the LINEJUDGE’S flag signals are correct. If they 
are not properly done, he/she may correct them.  
 
 
 
--- Page 22 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 21 
 
 
P R O T O C O L S   
 
The designation “relevant FIVB Delegate(s)” has been used in all protocols to apply to Technical Delegate 
and Refereeing Coach. Their specific roles are defined at the FIVB Beach Volleyball Handbook. 
 
O F F I C I A L  M A T C H  P R O T O C O L   
 
 
-10 min.  
Previous match finishes, referees to complete post-match formalities and exit court area. 
-8 min. 
 
Announcement of match as soon as court is prepared by the sand levellers, players and 
officials enter the court area.  Players from this time must be in official match uniforms.  
Watering and raking should be complete by this time. 
Players warm up on court area and other preparations, officials check match equipment, 
score sheet, conditions, players area, etc. 
-5 min. 
 
Coin toss taken in front of scorer's table. 
(Note:  If local conditions dictate, the coin toss time can be moved forward to allow extra 
warm up time). 
 
-4 min. 
 
Beginning of official warm up period (3 min.) 
-1 min 
 
End of official warm up period, players to leave the court area to their respective player's 
area. 
First referee to the referee's chair, second referee to position standing in front of the 
scorer's table, all other officials take their positions. 
Individual player’s announcement and entry onto the rear of the playing court (Fig 1). 
After last player’s entry to rear of court, the first referee whistles and players shake hands 
under the net (Fig 2). 
 
0 min 
 
Commencement of the match. 
End of 
match 
 
Players shake hands with their opponents and referees near the first referee's chair and 
proceed across the court to the scorer's table (Fig 3). 
The score sheet is signed by the captains. All participants gather their belongings, and the 
referees lead the teams to exit the court so that it can be prepared for the next match. 
 
Notes: 
 This protocol may be altered from 3 min to 5 min official warm up time by altering the toss to 
(-7 min). 
 It is not necessary to excessively delay the exit from the court by waiting for the referees to sign the 
score sheet.  This can be done outside the court area. 
 Coin toss can be taken off the court if required to speed up protocol. 
 In cases where the length of the warm-up is extended, by FIVB Officials, all officials should enter 
the court 10 min before the match and proceed with the protocol above from 8 min onwards. 
 Coaches are allowed in the court during respective team’s warm-up until the start of the official 
match protocol. Where applicable, upon confirmation by the Referee Coach it is possible for the 
team coaches to stay until immediately before the start of the coin toss. 
 If necessary, this protocol may be further adapted for particular requirements, i.e.: Television 
coverage, Sports Presentation, Covid countermeasures, etc.  
 
 
 
 
--- Page 23 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 22 
 
 
 
  
Match Protocol Fig 1 Match Protocol Fig 2  
 
 
  
 
  
Match Protocol Fig 3 Coin Toss and Match Protocol  
  
  
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 24 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 23 
 
 
F O R F E I T  A N D  D E F A U L T  P R O T O C O L   
 
The aim of this section is to provide REFEREES with a standardised method by which to deal with the 
situation of a forfeit. The forfeit by its nature is a difficult situation as not only can it potentially finish a match 
but it can easily result in a protest situation if the process is not followed exactly. Therefore, officials should 
pay attention that the processes outlined below are followed exactly, and that all pertinent information is 
recorded and communicated appropriately to anyone affected by the protocol.  
 
1 .  R E L E V A N T  R U L E S  
 
 The rules governing forfeits / defaults are primarily covered in two sections with the Official 
Beach Volleyball Rules: Rules 6.4 and 7.1 
 
Rule 6.4           Defaults and Incomplete Team: 
Rule 6.4.1 If a team refuses to play after being summoned to do so, it is declared in default 
and forfeits the match with the result 0-2 for the match and 0-21, 0-21 for each set. 
Rule 6.4.2 A team that does not appear on the playing court on time is declared in default. 
6.4.1 above 
Rule 6.4.3 A team that is declared INCOMPLETE for the set or for the match, loses the set or 
the match. The opponent team is given the points, or the points and the sets, 
needed to win the set or the match. The incomplete team keeps its points and sets. 
(Rules 6.2, 6.3, 7.3.1)  
“For FIVB, World and Official Competitions whenever Pool Play format is 
implemented, Rule 6.4 above may be subject to modifications as stated in the 
Specific Competition Regulations issued by the FIVB in due time, establishing the 
modality to be followed for treating the default and incomplete team cases” 
 
Rule 7.1           The Toss: 
 Before the official warm up, the FIRST REFEREE conducts the toss to decide 
upon the first service and the sides of the court in the first set.  
 
2 .  P O S S I B L E  S C E N A R I O S  
 
Based on the above rules there are three basic scenarios that are possible: 
 Scenario 1: A team formally forfeits the match prior to the commencement of the match 
 Scenario 2: A team forfeits the match because it was not present at the correct time in order to 
commence the match 
 Scenario 3: A team forfeits the match after the match has commenced. 
 
3 .  S C E N A R I O  1 : A  T E A M  F O R M A L L Y  F O R F E I T S  T H E  
M A T C H  P R I O R  T O  I T S  C O M M E N C E M E N T   
 
 This situation is controlled by the relevant FIVB Delegate(s) and has little impact on a 
REFEREE. 
 A REFEREE must complete the score sheet (if requested by the FIVB Delegate) in accordance 
with the FIVB Scoring Instructions 
 REFEREES must ensure that they are aware of any changes to the match schedule as a result 
of the forfeit. 
 
4 .  S C E N A R I O  2 :  A  T E A M  F O R F E I T S  T H E  M A T C H  
B E C A U S E  I T  W A S  N O T  P R E S E N T  A T  T H E  C O R R E C T  
T I M E  I N  O R D E R  T O  C O M M E N C E  A  M A T C H  
 
Essential Steps (proceed to the next step if not resolved) 
1. Verify that the teams are present 
2. Attempt to find the teams 
3. Inform the relevant FIVB Delegate(s) 
4. Continue the Match Protocol 
5. Official warm up time after coin toss 
6. Final forfeit decision 
 
 
--- Page 25 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 24 
 
Overview 
 The REFEREES in this situation must act quickly as time is very important 
 The REFEREES through their actions must try not to advantage one team over another 
 The REFEREE(S) should at no time make comments to the player(s) on the likely outcome / 
probability of a forfeit occurring 
 REFEREES should not assume that a team will not be present based on a previous forfeit by 
the team 
 
Specific Notes for each step 
Step 1 
 As soon as a REFEREE is present before the match they must verify that both teams (both 
players) are present 
 The REFEREE must be present before the commencement of the official warm up time. 
 
Step 2 
 If one or both are not present they should take all actions appropriate to immediately verify the 
team’s whereabouts. This includes use of Court Managers, Walkie-talkies and the SECOND 
REFEREE leaving the court area, to make sure that the information is appropriately conveyed 
to the relevant FIVB Delegate(s) and Tournament staff. 
 The FIRST REFEREE should stay at the court 
 
Step 3 
 If the situation is not immediately resolvable by the team coming to the court the relevant FIVB 
Delegate must be informed and requested to come to the court 
 Once the FIVB Technical Delegate is present at the court the final decision on all areas such 
as commencing the Match Protocol and forfeits is theirs to make. The REFEREES should 
continue (or proceed with) the Official Match Protocol for the tournament 
 The relevant FIVB Delegate(s) will try to ascertain the reason for the player(s) absence and 
advise the REFEREES actions accordingly 
 Ideally the relevant FIVB Delegate(s) should be present before the commencement of the 
Official Match Protocol. If not the REFEREE must take control of the situation but must note 
that only the FIVB Technical Delegate can make a final decision whether to forfeit a team. 
 
Step 4 
 If the relevant FIVB Delegate(s) is not present they should automatically commence / continue 
the Official Match Protocol (unless otherwise requested by the FIVB Delegate) 
 The REFEREES once the Official Match Protocol has commenced take all steps to continue 
this protocol without alteration (i.e. the protocol is maintained) 
 
Step 5 
 The REFEREE should at the correct time under the Official Match Schedule request (to the 
relevant FIVB Delegate(s)) that they should commence the official warm up period, starting 
with the coin toss (unless otherwise notified). 
 Special Protocol 1: If one team has no players present at the coin toss their opponents 
automatically win the coin toss and can chose to serve or receive etc. Only one player is 
required to conduct a coin toss. 
 The refereeing procedures involved in this Special Protocol are in order: 
1. Whistle and call the team Captains for the coin toss in front of the SCORER’s table 
2. Upon confirmation that only 1 team is present inform the respective Captain that 
they have automatically won the right to first choice (serve, receive or side of the 
court) 
3. Obtain from the team Captain present their first choice (e.g.: side of the court) 
4. Inform them that the other team Captain will complete their choices at the 
completion of the official warm up time 
5. Confirm with the SCORERS the decision of the team Captain and obtain the Pre 
match respective signature, together with any information available being recorded 
(e.g.: service order). Note at this stage the SCORER will not be able to complete 
the score sheet with finality to commence the match as either a) the sides of the 
court will not be known or b) The team who is serving and receiving will not be 
known 
6. Whistle and indicate the start of the official warm up time (e.g.: 5 minutes) 
7. Not interrupt the official warm up time of the teams to gather more information (if 
the other team arrives) 
8. Immediately at the end of the official warm up time, whistle, then signal the teams 
to go to their designated chairs 
--- Page 26 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 25 
 
9. Only the team present at the coin toss should proceed to their designated chairs 
10. The Captain of the team not present at the coin toss should come to the 
SCORER’s table and convey their decisions (serve, reception , side of the court) 
that are not already decided (point 4 above) 
11. The team Captain should sign the Pre match Captains section of the Scoresheet 
and indicate service order. 
12. The SCORER should complete the scoresheet and confirm to the match officials 
that all information required has been received 
13. The team Captain present at the coin toss should be informed of the decision of 
the other team 
14. The match officials should commence the match as soon as possible 
 
 Special Protocol 2: If neither team is present (i.e. there are no players) the coin toss is not 
conducted but the time should be noted in the score sheet’s Remarks Section and the 
REFEREE commences the timing as per the Official Match Protocol (announcing that it has 
commenced) 
 Many of the refereeing procedures for Special Protocol 1 apply to Special Protocol 2 but are 
adapted because of no team being present at the coin toss 
 If a team arrives during the Official Match Protocol , the Protocol is continued without alteration 
and the late team receives no additional warm up time (unless otherwise notified) 
 Both of the above Special Protocols should be done as quickly as possible and should not 
extend the time of the Official Match Protocol. 
 
Step 6 
 The Official Warm Up time is completed by the FIRST REFEREE blowing their whistle and 
indicating that the match should be ready to commence. 
 If at this time the player(s) are still not present the REFEREE should notify the relevant FIVB 
Delegate(s) of this fact (i.e.: That based on the REFEREE’s timing the Official Match Protocol 
has finished and that the match is now scheduled to commence). 
 The FIRST REFEREE does not need to go to the REFEREE’s stand at the end of the Official 
Match Protocol.  
 The relevant FIVB Delegate(s) is/ are responsible for conveying any decision regarding the 
forfeit to the team Captain(s) (if present), match officials, spectators, media etc. 
 Scoring of the match result is done in accordance with Section 7: Scoring 
 
5 .  S C E N A R I O  3 :  A  T E A M  F O R F E I T S  T H E  M A T C H  
A F T E R  T H E  M A T C H  H A S  C O M M E N C E D  
 
 This situation will usually occur due to an injury (but not exclusively) 
 The relevant FIVB Delegate(s) should be called to the court as soon as possible. 
 The FIRST REFEREE must initially verbally verify that the team wishes to default thus 
forfeiting the match. This may be after the part of a Medical Assistance Protocol. 
 The FIRST REFEREE must complete the following: 
1. Obtain the signature on the score sheet of the Captain of the team wishing to 
forfeit (this confirms their desire to forfeit) 
2. Confirm with the relevant FIVB Delegate(s) the forfeit 
3. Notify the opposing team Captain of the forfeit 
4. Oversee the completion of the score sheet and sign it to verify its contents 
 Scoring of the match result is done in accordance with Section 7: Scoring 
 
6 .  S P E C I F I C  N O T E S  
 
 Referees should be familiar with the FIVB Official Match Protocol 
 
7 .  S C O R I N G  
 
 The relevant FIVB Delegate(s) is in Scenario 1 and 2 responsible for verifying the Official 
Match Result and may record as appropriate comments in the Remarks Section 
 At the completion of the match, the FIRST REFEREE should ensure that the Remarks 
section of the scoresheet has been completed with all the required information as indicated 
by this protocol and shown by the example in the Score sheet Instructions.   
 If the Referee Coach (RC) is not present at the court at the completion of the match, the 
FIRST REFEREE must obtain the respective signature prior to the score sheet being 
delivered to the Competition Office, although avoiding any delays for BVIS purposes. 
 
--- Page 27 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 26 
 
B A L L  M A R K  P R O T O C O L   
 
The aim of this section is to provide REFEREES with a standardised and quick method by which to deal 
with the situation of a ball mark protocol being initiated. Officials should pay attention that the process is 
transparent, not protracted and that the result is decisive and well communicated with the match resuming 
as quickly as possible.   
The Ball Mark Protocol as it is applied during a match has only a few components and should be completed 
by the officials, especially the FIRST REFEREE with a great deal of accuracy and speed to allow a quick 
resume of the match. The main components of a Ball Mark Protocol are: 
1. Teams are entitled to request a “Ball Mark Protocol” to be implemented at the end of the rally, 
when they would like a review of the referees’ decision concerning the ball ‘in’ / ‘out’ for side 
and end lines. 
2. Teams will have the right to request another “BMP” if their request is successful, with a limit of 
a maximum of two unsuccessful BMP requests per set. 
3. A BMP may be requested by either player from either team.  The players/teams have five 
seconds after the rally is over to make the request. However, a team cannot request for a BMP 
after having switched the court. 
                               SIGNAL FOR LATE BMP REQUEST 
                      (the referee signals by covering the wrist with the joined fingers of the other hand) 
 
 
4. The player must indicate the request by showing a letter “C” signal with their fingers, followed 
by showing to the 1st referee the appropriate BMP signal. Players can make the request from 
any position in the field of play. 
 
MANDATORY SIGNALS FOR BMP REQUEST 
        (the letter “C” is formed with the fingers)      (followed by player indicating a court line) 
 
 
  
--- Page 28 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 27 
 
5. BMP requests for situations where the ball mark would not ensure reliable evidence (for 
instance, the referee from his/her position judges that the ball touched the line before 
contacting the sand slightly away of the line’s position) shall not be accepted. 
6. The above cases (point 5) will be considered an “illegal BMP request” and rejected. The 1st 
referee actions will be to: 
a. inform the concerned player/team of his/her decision,  
b. make the official Illegal BMP request signal. 
                                SIGNAL FOR ILLEGAL BMP REQUEST 
                                         (the referee signals an “X”) 
 
                            
  
 
7. BMP takes precedence over all other match actions – e.g., time out requests - which may be 
impacted by the result of the BMP. 
8. Upon a valid BMP request, the 1st Referee shall immediately: 
a. Come down from the stand and indicate to the relevant Line judge(s) that they are 
required to come to the position of the ball mark. 
b. If necessary, ask that the players of the team on the side of the ball mark remove 
themselves from the area of the ball mark. This is extremely important for it grants 
equal and fair treatment to both teams within the process. However, all players must 
remain on the court whilst the review process is taking place. 
c. Initiate the verification of the ball mark (in or out): 
i. once the area near the ball mark is free from players and any relevant Line 
judge(s) are present, the 1st Referee should proceed carefully into structured 
questioning of the Line judge(s) if required. 
ii. initially it should be established if the ball hit the line. This includes the case 
where the line was in a raised position and touched by the ball.  
iii. it is important that the LINE JUDGE (if appropriate) should be given the 
opportunity to: 
1. show the position of the ball mark (without touching it) 
2. explain verbally what they saw including both the action of the ball 
contacting the sand and any subsequent actions 
iv. the 1st Referee should be clear in his/ her understanding of what the LINE 
JUDGE has conveyed to them. A good strategy is to get the sequence of 
events explained as this happened. 
v. when the 1st Referee is satisfied that they have received all available 
information and are able to make a decision he/ she should quickly move to the 
stand signaling the decision on the ball mark (indicate which team now has the 
serve) and if applicable penalizing any players crossing the net. NO further 
delays shall be permitted and the players will be urged to immediately resume 
play. 
--- Page 29 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 28 
 
vi. the 2nd Referee should then move to the side of the team which loses the rally 
after the 1st Referee makes the decision. 
vii. if applicable 1st Referee to verbally announce to the crowd the result of the ball 
mark protocol at the same time he/she signals the decision. 
9. After the decision of the BMP has been finalized, the match will continue, with the score 
adjusted according the decision. 
10. At a BMP request, 2nd Referees shall: 
a. Place themselves close to the net to dissuade, either through body position or verbal 
communication, the opponent team from crossing the net. It is good practice to remind 
teams that it is illegal for them to cross the net or its extension. 
b. Establish eye contact with the 1st Referee during the entire process, and if required 
they may assist the 1st Referee in the final decision.  
c. Before the match resumes, the 2nd Referee must verify that the score sheet and all 
scoreboards in the competition area are correct and the players on court are in their 
correct positions (rotation) according to the e-score sheet. 
11. Consequences of successful/ unsuccessful challenges: 
a. a second unsuccessful BMP by a team in a set will result in the requesting team not 
being able to request more BMP for the remainder of that set, 
b. after a second unsuccessful BMP by a team, the 2nd Referee shall inform the 
concerned team Captain that the team has exhausted the BMP requests for that set, 
c. if applicable, 1st Referee to verbally this situation to the audience thru the PA system. 
12. Under very exceptional circumstances, the 1st Referee has the right to initiate a BMP review 
should he/she feel unsure about his/her decision in any rally. In this case the referee shall: 
a. stop play with a whistle, 
b. followed by immediately initiating the verification of the ball mark (in or out), 
c. followed by quickly returning to the stand and signalling the decision on the ball mark. 
The 1st Referee’s right to request a challenge is one more way to ensure that the final decision of 
the awarding of the points to the teams will be fair, will correspond to the effort of the athletes, and 
will not be influenced by human error. 
13. It is possible that a team decides to cancel a BMP request before the process has started, or 
after the process is in its very initial stages. However, such cases must not imply a delay to the 
game, and so be dealt with under the delay sanction scale. 
14. A Team may request a BMP only once within the same interruption – i.e., they cannot make a second 
request within the same interruption.  
15. Players should refrain from deliberately covering up/ altering, etc, the ball mark. The 1st 
Referee shall sanction this as appropriate.  
16. For cases where the ball mark has been altered due to natural occurrences or deliberate action 
by teams/players, preventing its review, the referee call stands. The exception is where the 
winning team deliberately alters the line, in this case the rally must be replayed. Then despite 
the outcome of the situation not being in favour of the requesting team, it will still keep the number of 
BMP requests available. 
17. The result of the BMP review, once announced by the 1st Referee, is final and cannot be 
appealed. 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 30 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 29 
 
 
M E D I C A L  A S S I S T A N C E  P R O T O C O L S   
 
To be utilised at FIVB World Competitions under rule 17.1 of the Official Beach Volleyball Rules 
Medical assistance will be granted to athletes through the use of the relevant protocols as herewith listed 
• Medical Timeout (MTO) – to be implemented exclusively for significant blood related injury  
• Recovery Interruption (RIT) – to be implemented for: 
- any non-blood injury (for traumatic, non-traumatic, and non-contact injuries that are not blood 
related; 
- illness in relation to severe weather conditions officially declared (for illness in relation to 
severe weather conditions officially declared);  
- use of toilets (for delay at the use of toilets during the match).  
For any of the cases above, if the 1st referee judges the case as minor and potentially quickly resolved, this 
must be treated with no delay, without any need for medical assistance. Otherwise, for the RIT cases 
athletes must first use a team time out or other regular interruptions if available at the time, before the 1st 
referee can authorize the start of the relevant protocol.  
Referees should be aware of the circumstances leading up to the injury/illness as they are responsible to 
establish its nature and extent (if minor or significant). 
“Medical Time Out” (MTO) and “Recovery Interruption” (RIT) protocols, when implemented must be dealt 
with the quickest the possible and the complete process must not last more than 5 minutes total, with the 
time counting starting from the moment the protocol is initiated by the 1st referee. 
The duration of the “medical assistance” protocols shall be electronically timed from the moment the scorer 
hits the relevant button at the e-scoresheet, with the timer being displayed at the litescore. The timing shall 
start from the whistle of the 1st referee after he/she initiates the “Medical Time Out” or the “Recovery 
Interruption”, ending when the litescore buzzer signals the end of the maximum authorized 5 minutes, or at 
the whistle of the 1st referee immediately after treatment is declared complete by the official medical 
personnel, or if no treatment can be provided, or when the player declares that he/she is ready to resume 
play. In case no e-scoresheet software is applied the medical assistance shall be manually timed and 
recorded by the official scorer. This includes in this sequence: Time the 1st referee initiated the protocol (in 
hours, minutes and seconds); the set; the score; team serving; player to undergo medical assistance; the 
type of medical assistance provided; Time match resumed or Time of forfeit; duration of the medical 
assistance interruption.  
Under all circumstances above, the official medical personnel shall be requested to come to the court as it 
will be their responsibility to supervise the treatment and report to the 1st referee when this has been 
completed, unless the player declares her/himself ready to resume play before their arrival at the court area 
When treatment is completed or if no treatment can be provided in that short time period, play must resume 
or the relevant team is declared incomplete for the set or the match, as applicable. 
Medical treatment may be provided to players at regular game interruptions (TO, TTO, intervals) with no 
delay to the game.   
  
G E N E R A L  O V E R V I E W   
 
Medical assistance may be provided by official medical personnel (i.e., physician and/or physical therapist 
from the event organizer) or team’s medical personnel (i.e., team physician and/or team physical therapist, 
provided that these have been properly accredited for the event), at the choice of the team.  
In any case the official medical personnel shall be requested to come to the court as it will be their 
responsibility to supervise the treatment and report to the 1st referee when this has been completed, unless 
the player declares her/himself ready to resume play before their arrival at the court area. 
Medical personnel of the team are allowed on court. If the team’s medical personnel succeed in resolving 
the case before the arrival of the requested official medical personnel and the player declares that he/she is 
ready to resume play, the Referee is not required to wait for the official medical personnel arrival. The 
relevant medical assistance protocol will be in any case assigned to that player. 
To be able to provide treatment during matches, official medical personnel must (while team medical 
personnel are recommended to) be seated in the immediate courtside area during the match. No additional 
time will be granted to wait for team’s medical personnel to make their way to the court.  
The decision whether a player is medically fit or not to resume after an injury/illness depends entirely upon 
the player.  Even if the official medical personnel advise the player not to continue, the final decision of 
whether to resume or not rests with the player. This condition is covered in the signed "Players 
--- Page 31 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 30 
 
Commitment". However, in extreme cases, the doctor of the competition can oppose the return of an 
injured/ill player. 
In the first case above, the referees shall record at the “remarks section” of the score sheet that the player 
specifically requested to continue the match against medical advice from the official medical personnel. 
The relevant post-match signature by the captain will verify this statement. 
It is possible for the same player to undergo “Medical Time Out” with “Recovery Interruption” in the same 
match, as follows: 
• MTO (blood related injury) – the player must be allowed treatment for blood-related injury at any 
and all times; 
• RIT (any non-blood injury, including traumatic, non-traumatic, and non-contact injuries that are not 
blood related; illness in relation to severe weather conditions officially declared; or use of toilets) – 
each athlete is entitled to maximum one RIT (Recovery Interruption) per match per athlete. 
• MTO and one RIT stoppage can occur in the same match to the same player, regardless of the 
sequence of use. 
Any time a forfeit due to injury/illness occurs (including before the match starts) official medical personnel 
and the FIVB Medical Delegate (if one is appointed to the event) must be present. 
 
 
1 .  M E D I C A L  T I M E  O U T  –  B L O O D  I N J U R Y   
 
To be implemented exclusively for significant blood related injuries.  
 
a )  O V E R V I E W 
 
 The safety of all parties is of prime importance, and blood injuries must therefore be treated without 
delay, whether detected by the player or the officials.  
 If the bleeding is minor and can be stopped easily so as to cause a minimum delay to the match, 
this is not regarded as a “medical time out”. 
 If the bleeding is more significant, it should be treated as requiring medical assistance and treated 
as outlined below. The 1st referee shall then authorize a “medical time out”. 
 For either case above, the Referees must inspect all match balls and balls with any blood spill 
should be replaced and subsequently cleaned and disinfected. Blood on any other equipment 
should also be cleaned and disinfected. 
 The “Medical Time Out” protocol is a series of structured steps designed to enable successful 
resolution of a blood related injury with minimum delay (under Rule 17.1). 
 
b )  A T  T H E  T I M E  O F  T H E  B L O O D  I N J U R Y 
 
 Upon the concerned player or the referees realize bleeding, as soon as the rally is interrupted or 
finishes if this is the last action of the rally, the 2nd referee must immediately be active in going to 
the player and establishing the extent of the bleeding. 
 If the bleeding is minor and can be stopped easily, this must be treated without delay with the 2nd 
referee directing the player to the scorer’s table where a medical kit is available for him/her to clean 
the cut and eventually bandage it.     
 If the bleeding is more significant, then the 2nd referee must signal to the 1st referee to come down 
the stand and inform the player that a “medical time out” will be initiated by the 1st referee, followed 
by asking the player if he/she wishes to be treated by the official medical personnel of the 
tournament or the team’s accredited medical personnel? 
 The 2nd referee will then call the relevant medical assistance to the court, followed by the 1st 
referee whistle and relevant signal initiating the protocol.  
 Note: The 1st referee shall initiate the protocol upon arrival of the official medical personnel in case 
this has been the choice of the injured player, otherwise if no official medical personnel available or 
if the player asked for their own accredited medical personnel then the 1st referee shall initiate the 
protocol immediately. 
 The 1st referee will then notify the scorer to start the timing and the recording of the “medical time 
out” as appropriate. 
 Note: under all circumstances, the official medical personnel shall be requested to come to the 
court and the Technical Delegate and/or Referee Coach informed so that they can oversee the 
situation. 
--- Page 32 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 31 
 
 
c )  U P O N  T H E  M E D I C A L  T I M E O U T  B E I N G  I N I T I A T E D    
 
 The 2nd referee immediately notifies a number of people to come to the court:  FIVB Technical 
Delegate, FIVB Referee Coach and FIVB Medical Delegate if present. 
 It is desirable that the 2nd referee is the one to actively search for these above listed people, which 
ultimately may require leaving the playing area or to make use of a Walkie-Talkie. The 1st referee 
shall maintain supervision of the injured player. 
 It is acceptable that the injured player remains in a fixed position on the court if indicated. The 
player can also move freely within the playing court or free zone or go to the respective team area.  
 If requested by the medical personnel in attendance, with the approval by the 1st referee, the 
injured player may be allowed to leave the court if the assistance necessary cannot be provided 
within the playing area. This may occur in some situations (e.g. to clean or suture a wound). A 
player who must leave the court area shall be accompanied by the 2nd referee (or Referee Coach, 
or reserve referee if applicable).  
 The 1st referee (or alternatively the official who has accompanied the player) actively supervises 
the process aiming at the injured player to return to position within the required recovery time. 
 The 2nd referee monitors that the injured player’s team-mate and the opponents remain on the 
playing court or free zone or go to their respective team’s area. Players are entitled to use balls 
during this time.  
 The 2nd referee should during the recovery time also verify that all the details have been recorded 
correctly by the scorer. Special attention must be given in case no e-scoresheet software applies. 
 Players should be informed of the elapsed time during the medical time out. The 1st referee 
informs the injured player and the medical personnel while the 2nd referee is responsible to inform 
the injured player’s team-mate and the opponents. 
 At the completion of the “medical time out” the 1st referee shall move back to the stand, with the 
2nd referee asking the injured player to return to their position on the court, followed by indicating 
to the official scorer to ensure the recording of the required details on the score sheet 
 Note that the ending of the recovery time will be signalled by the buzzer after the maximum 
authorized 5 minutes have been exhausted, or otherwise by the whistle of the 1st referee 
immediately after treatment is declared complete by the official medical personnel, or if no 
treatment can be provided, or when the player declares that he/she is ready to resume play. 
 However, before a player being allowed to return to the court the bleeding has to be completely 
stopped or contained (closed) so that no blood spill can occur.  
 
 
2 .  R E C O V E R Y  I N T E R R U P T I O N   
 
To be implemented for: 
- Any non-blood injury, including traumatic, non-traumatic, and non-contact injuries that are not 
blood related;  
- Illness in relation to severe weather conditions officially declared;  
- Use of toilets.  
 
a )  O V E R V I E W 
 
 The safety of all parties is of prime importance, so traumatic, non-traumatic, and non-contact 
injuries that are not blood related, must be treated without delay, whether detected by the player or 
the officials. 
 With the aim being, manipulation prevention harmonized with ensuring the safety of all parties, any 
genuine cases of injuries must be the object of treatment through the quick implementation of the 
“medical assistance protocols”.  
 If the injury is minor and can be resolved easily so as to cause a minimum delay to the match, this 
is not regarded as requiring medical assistance. 
 If the injury is more significant, it should be treated as requiring medical assistance and treated as 
outlined below.  
--- Page 33 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 32 
 
 If the team has an available time out, or the play that just finished lead to a technical time out or to 
the set interval, then treatment can be provided with no delay to the game. Otherwise, the 1st 
referee shall authorize a “Recovery Interruption”. 
 A player is not entitled to a second “Recovery Interruption” in the match. 
 The “Recovery Interruption” protocol, is a series of structured steps designed to enable successful 
resolution of an injury/illness with minimum delay (under Rule 17.1). 
 
b )  A T  T H E  T I M E  O F  T H E  I N J U R Y /  I L L N E S S 
 
 Upon the concerned player or the referees realize an injury/illness, as soon as the rally is 
interrupted or finishes if this is the last action of the rally, the 2nd referee must immediately be 
active in going to the player and establishing the extent and nature of the injury. 
 If the injury is minor and can be resolved easily, this must be treated without delay with the 2nd 
referee actively supervising the process as to the injured player to return to position the sooner the 
possible.     
 If the injury is more significant and the team has no available time out, and the play that just 
finished did not lead to a technical time out or to the set interval, then the 2nd referee must signal 
to the 1st referee to come down the stand and inform the player that a “recovery interruption” will 
be initiated by the 1st referee, followed by asking the player if he/she wishes to be treated by the 
official medical personnel of the tournament or the team’s accredited medical personnel? 
 The 2nd referee will then call the relevant medical assistance to the court, followed by the 1st 
referee whistle and relevant signal initiating the protocol. 
 Note: The 1st referee shall initiate the protocol upon arrival of the official medical personnel in case 
this has been the choice of the injured player, otherwise if no official medical personnel available or 
if the player asked for their own accredited medical personnel, then the 1st referee shall initiate the 
protocol immediately. 
 The 1st referee will then notify the scorer to start the timing and the recording of the “recovery 
interruption” as appropriate. 
 Note: under all circumstances, the official medical personnel shall be requested to come to the 
court and the FIVB Delegates informed so that they can oversee the situation. 
 
c )  U P O N  T H E  R E C O V E R Y  I N T E R R U P T I O N  B E I N G  I N I T I A T E D    
 
 The 2nd referee immediately notifies a number of people to come to the court:  FIVB Technical 
Delegate, FIVB Referee Coach and FIVB Medical Delegate if present. 
 It is desirable that the 2nd referee is the one to actively search for these above listed people, which 
ultimately may require leaving the playing area or to make use of a Walkie-Talkie. The 1st referee 
shall maintain supervision of the injured/ill player. 
 It is acceptable that the injured/ill player remains in a fixed position on the court if indicated. The 
player can also move freely within the playing court or free zone or go to the respective team area.  
 If requested by the medical personnel in attendance, with the approval by the 1st referee, the 
injured player may be allowed to leave the court if the assistance necessary cannot be provided 
within the playing area. This may occur in some situations. A player who must leave the court area 
shall be accompanied by the 2nd referee (or Referee Coach, or reserve referee if applicable).  
 The 1st referee (or alternatively the official who has accompanied the player) actively supervises 
the process aiming at the injured player to return to position within the required recovery time. 
 The 2nd referee monitors that the injured player’s team-mate and the opponents remain on the 
playing court or free zone or go to their respective team’s area. Players are entitled to use balls 
during this time.  
 The 2nd referee should during the recovery time also verify that all the details have been recorded 
correctly by the scorer. Special attention must be given in case no e-scoresheet software applies. 
 Players should be informed of the elapsed time during the “recovery interruption”. The 1st referee 
informs the injured player and the medical personnel, while the 2nd referee is responsible to inform 
the injured player’s team-mate and the opponents. 
 At the completion of the “recovery interruption” the 1st referee shall move back to the stand, with 
the 2nd referee asking the injured player to return to their position on the court, followed by 
indicating to the official scorer the nature of the “recovery interruption” (non-blood injury; illness in 
--- Page 34 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 33 
 
relation to severe weather conditions; use of toilets) ensuring that the recording of the required 
details on the score sheet are accurate.  
 Note that the ending of the recovery time will be signaled by the buzzer after the maximum 
authorized 5 minutes have been exhausted, or otherwise by the whistle of the 1st referee 
immediately after treatment is declared complete by the official medical personnel, or if no 
treatment can be provided, or when the player declares that he/she is ready to resume play. 
 
 
G E N E R A L  A D D I T I O N A L  N O T E S  
 
 Players are entitled to use toilets at any time during the match, as long as they do not delay the 
game. 
 In the case a player delays the normal sequence of the game while using the toilets, a “Recovery 
Interruption – use of toilets” will be assigned to that player with the match resuming as soon as the 
player is back to the court. 
 Organizers are required to supply 2 dedicated athletes’ toilets (one for the women and one for the 
men) - portable if it is not possible to use an existing facility - within a range of maximum 100 
meters from any of the competition courts. Referees are required to report this aspect at their 
homologation court checking prior to the start of the tournament. 
 All Referees must have awareness of the physical location of the athlete dedicated toilets, easier 
and safer access etc 
 All Referees and the FIVB Referee Coach must have awareness of the physical location of the 
medical assistance in its various forms:  First aid, doctors, physiotherapists, ambulance access etc. 
 The Referees must be aware as to the official exact nature of a medical personnel member as 
agreed by the Technical Delegate, as there are various forms of medical personnel, (medical 
doctor, and physiotherapist). The Referees must ensure that the medical personnel member is 
appropriate to treat the players’ injury.  
 Organizers are required to provide medical personnel (first aid, medical doctor and physiotherapist) 
at all court locations. This includes events with more than 1 venue. 
 For any cases of medical related forfeit, the injured/ill player shall be asked by the Referee if this is 
due to heat exhaustion and/or dehydration. If this is the case, the player is also asked “Have you 
suffered from vomiting and/or diarrhea during the past five days?” This information is then reported 
to the Referee Coach for the relevant purposes (BVB-45 Heat Stress Monitoring Results). 
 In the case of an athlete being assigned a “Recovery Interruption” or forfeiting a match due to an 
alleged injury/illness, immediately following the relevant score sheet administration he/she will be 
given a copy of the BVB/49 form by the match referees. The follow up of the concerned procedure 
is the responsibility of the injured/ill player. (refer to FIVB Beach Volleyball Sport Operations 
Manual)). However, the referees of the match must immediately notify the RC verbally and via the 
scoresheet that a BVB/49 form has been delivered to that concerned player.  
 Scorers must be closely questioned in their training to verify that they fully understand Medicals 
Assistance circumstances and resultant recording on the score sheet. 
 At the completion of the match, the 1st referee should ensure that the Remarks section of the 
score sheet has been completed with all the required information as indicated by this protocol and 
shown by the example in the Scoresheet Instructions.  
 At FIVB World and Official Competitions, a maximum of two “Recovery Interruption” due to non-
traumatic, and non-contact injuries that are not blood related; illness in relation to severe weather 
conditions officially declared; or use of toilets, are allowed per athlete within a rolling 12-month 
period. (refer to FIVB Beach Volleyball Sport Operations Manual)). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 35 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 34 
 
 
P R O T E S T  P R O T O C O L   
 
To be utilised at FIVB, World and Official Competitions under rules 5.1.2.1 and 5.1.3.2 of the Official Beach 
Volleyball Rules.  
 
 
1 .  O V E R V I E W 
 
 The Protest Protocol is a series of structured steps designed to enable successful resolution of a 
protest on the application of the rules of the game, from player(s) involved in FIVB Beach Volleyball 
Competitions. 
 A Protest Protocol is commenced by a team Captain formally indicating his / her wish to protest 
following the explanation he / she has received on the application or interpretation of the rules from 
the FIRST REFEREE. 
 The Protest Protocol may be undertaken by the relevant FIVB Official(s) based on circumstances 
before, during or after a match. 
 The relevant FIVB Official(s) will consider the protest on its merits based on three criteria. 
 Two levels of Protest Protocol exist, these being undertaken either at the time of the 
circumstances(s) (Level 1) and / or after the match has been completed (Level 2). 
 
 
2 .  A I M  O F  T H E  P R O T E S T  P R O T O C O L  
 
 The Protest Protocol represents the FIVB’s formal procedure to deal with problems occurring 
before, during and after a match. Therefore the aims of the Protest Protocol are: 
1. To establish or re-establish the match conditions to the match’s previous state of play and 
to recommence play as soon as applicable 
2. To provide a structured process to allow resolution of Protests governed by the appropriate 
FIVB regulations or rules 
3. To enact a procedure that has a minimal impact on the flow of a match especially if the 
Protest involves more than one Level of jurisdiction  
4. To implement a Protocol that is logical, transparent and easy to follow 
5. To implement a Protocol that is based on sound legal and ethical grounds 
6. To implement a Protocol that maximises the relevant FIVB Official(s’) chances of making a 
correct decision on the legitimacy of the Protest by the player(s). 
 
 
3 .  C R I T E R I A  F O R  E V A L U A T I N G  A  P R O T E S T 
 
 The criteria for acceptance of a legitimate Protest shall involve any one or more of the following 
circumstances: 
1. The REFEREE misinterpreted or did not correctly apply the rules / regulations, or did not 
assume the consequences of his/ her decisions. 
2. There is a scoring error (rotation or match score) 
3. A technical aspect of the match conditions (weather, light etc) 
 The FIRST REFEREE must only consider these three criteria in evaluating whether to accept a 
Protest as being valid or not and therefore capable of potential consideration.  
 It is improper for the FIRST REFEREE to accept a Protest that involves playing actions or 
misconduct unless there is a challenge on possible misinterpretation of the Rules of the Game. 
 The relevant FIVB Delegate(s) must also utilise these three criteria to evaluate the relative merits 
of the Protest once it has been accepted as valid for consideration. The FIVB Delegate(s) must 
clearly identify which of the three criteria apply to the protest. It is possible that a protest may 
satisfy more than 1 criterion. 
 The relevant FIVB Delegate(s) may also consider if due process has been observed in the 
consideration of the Protest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 36 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 35 
 
4 .  F I R S T  R E F E R E E ’ S  A C T I O N S  P R I O R  T O  C O M M E N C E M E N T  
O F  P R O T E S T  P R O T O C O L 
 
 A Protest Protocol is commenced by a team Captain formally indicating his / her wish to protest 
following the explanation he / she has received on the application or interpretation of the rules from 
the FIRST REFEREE. 
 The FIRST REFEREE must therefore, prior to signalling for the relevant FIVB Delegate(s) to enter 
the court, ensure that all practicable steps have been taken to ensure that the Protest Protocol is 
not enacted. This includes: 
1. Communicating clearly to the team Captain the nature of the fault / basis of decision 
2. Repetition of hand signals where appropriate 
3. Consultation with all relevant officials applicable to the application / interpretation of the 
rule(s) 
4. Confirm the criteria for a valid protest 
5. Confirm that, after all the above steps have been undertaken, that the team Captain wishes 
to formally protest. 
 The FIRST REFEREE should not: 
1. Once a team Captain has formally protested and this meets the criteria for a valid protest 
choose not to request the relevant FIVB Delegate(s) presence on court. 
2. State to the players the likely outcome of the protest. 
 
 
5 .  P R O T E S T  P R O T O C O L  L E V E L  1 :  R E S O L V E D  A T  T I M E  O F  
P R O T E S T  ( b y  R e f  C o a c h  o r  T e c h n i c a l  D e l e g a t e) 
 
5.1 Overview of Protocol for resolving Protest at the time of player(s) initiation  
 A Protest Protocol (Level 1) is commenced by a team Captain formally indicating his / her wish to 
protest following the explanation he / she has received on the application or interpretation of the 
rules from the FIRST REFEREE and the FIRST REFEREE then requesting the presence of the 
relevant FIVB Delegate(s).  
 The Protest Protocol Level 1 (both before or during a match) involves the following stages: 
1. Initial determination of nature of Protest  
2. Decision whether to proceed with Protocol based on its validity  
3. Gaining of further information / evidence applicable to Protest 
4. Conveying results of Protest to relevant Officials and Players 
5. Conveying results of the Protest to Scorers and other parties  
6. Starting or recommencing the match. 
 A Protest Protocol (Level 1) is the first of two stages of potential protest. 
 
5.2 Who evaluates the protest?  
 The Referee Coach will usually undertake a Protest Protocol at the time of the protest. Only in 
exceptional circumstances would a Level 1 Protest not be undertaken at the time of its initiation. 
 In exceptional circumstances the Technical Delegate may replace or substitute for the Referee 
Coach. 
 Another FIVB Official may in exceptional circumstances assist the FIVB Delegate who evaluates 
the validity of a protest. 
 The FIVB Delegate evaluating the protest should in all but exceptional circumstances not be from a 
country involved in the protest nor have a conflict of interest in its potential outcome. 
 Persons providing information to the Protest Protocol do not have a decision-making authority on 
the validity or outcome of the protest. 
 All FIVB Delegate(s), especially the Referee Coach, should not place themselves in a position to 
potentially influence proceedings before the Protest Protocol has commenced. 
 Referee Coaches should ensure that their movements during the competition maximises their 
potential availability for Protest Protocols. 
 
5.3 How is the Protest Protocol commenced? (Referee Delegate to conduct) 
 The Protocol commences with the signal of the FIRST REFEREE indicating that the Referee 
Coach should enter the Field of Play. 
 A Protest may only be requested by the team Captain(s).  
--- Page 37 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 36 
 
 The FIRST REFEREE should signal only to the Referee Coach when the team Captain(s) has 
formally (as defined in rule 5.1.2.1) indicated his / her wish to institute a Protest Protocol and this 
meets the criteria for a valid protest.  
 The Protest Protocol (Level 1) implies the payment of a sanction fee (bond) as ruled by the FIVB 
Handbook.  
 
5.4 The process of the Protest Protocol (after Protocol commenced) 
 The players should initially go to their respective designated chairs. 
 The Referee Coach should initially speak to the FIRST REFEREE to obtain the general nature of 
the Protest.  
 The Referee Coach must then confirm with the relevant team Captain the basis for their Protest. 
 The Referee Coach should then if needed clarify any points of uncertainty with the FIRST 
REFEREE. 
 Information / evidence should then be gathered from other parties pertinent to the decision. 
 This information / evidence should if possible be gathered individually but if appropriate may be 
gathered collectively. 
 A person to translate this information / evidence may be utilised. 
 The Protocol should, where possible, be conducted in the working language of the FIVB: English.  
 The process of gathering of information / evidence should be conducted near the SCORER’s table 
and the relevant team area. 
 The players should not be physically present at the questioning of the FIRST REFEREE or other 
parties. 
 The overall process must be a clearly structured pattern for gathering information / evidence. 
 During the Protest Protocol the players may after an initial organisational time period: 
1. Use the playing court but not leave the free zone 
2. Use the match balls 
3. Use the current side of the court that they are playing on or both sides of the court by 
agreement of all the players. 
 
5.5 Resolution of a Protest Protocol 
 The decision to resolve a Protest Protocol should be based on the following: 
1. Strict interpretation of the criteria for evaluating a Protest (section 3 above) 
2. An assumption that the decision as made by the match officials is correct, especially the 
final decision of the FIRST REFEREE 
3. The facts as established by questioning the parties involved with the Protest, especially the 
observations of the match officials 
4. The establishment of the correctness of the officials’ actions in relation to the Rules of the 
Game. 
5. Where the Rules of the Game do not cover a specific action the Referee Coach may 
interpret the spirit of the Rules of the Game. 
 The FIRST REFEREE should be the first person informed of the outcome of the Protest Protocol 
followed by appropriate other match officials 
 The Captains of both teams should then be informed on court of the result of the Protest Protocol. 
The Captains should receive a brief summary of the basis for the decision. 
 If, upon being informed no team Captain(s) question the decision, the Protest Protocol is 
considered resolved and officially closed.  
 Captain(s) of either team that disagree with the decision, have the right to request at that moment a 
Protest Protocol at Level 2 which may be then confirmed at the end of the match. 
 
5.6 Recommencement of the match 
 Following the Referee Coach’s conveying of the decision to the appropriate match officials and 
players the following steps may be necessary to recommence play: 
1. Decision conveyed to the Scorer  
2. Decision conveyed to the public (which may include announcement of resulting decision) 
3. Decision conveyed to the media (television, radio etc). 
 If the protest by the team Captain is successful all measures necessary to correct the match state 
(as advised by the Referee Coach) must be undertaken. 
 
5.7 Possible consequences of a Protest Protocol 
 There are 3 possible consequences of a protest at Level 1 (resolved or attempted to be resolved at 
the time of the Protest): 
--- Page 38 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 37 
 
1. Following the Protocol the protest by the team Captain(s) is rejected. In this circumstance 
the Technical Delegate will be notified by the Referee Del Referee Coach and a fine 
corresponding to the Protest Level 1 fee will be applied (see FIVB Beach Volleyball 
Handbook, Chapter addressing Specific Regulations and Sanctions). 
2. Following the Protocol the protest by the team Captain(s) is accepted. No fine applies here 
3. The Protest Protocol could not be undertaken (e.g.: no FIVB Official available) and / or the 
team Captain(s) may appeal the result of the Protest Protocol at Level 1. Both of these 
situations are resolved under Level 2 (after the match has finished). 
 
5.8 How is a Protest Protocol recorded on the score sheet? 
 At the time the Referee Coach initially enters the court the SCORER should record on the score 
sheet (as per the FIVB Score sheet Instructions) sufficient match details to be able to recommence 
the match from this point. 
 The SCORER should not record any factual information regarding the basis of the protest. 
 If the Protest Protocol is enacted and subsequently is rejected the words REJECTED LEVEL 1 
should be recorded in the remarks section. 
 If the Protest Protocol is enacted and subsequently is accepted the words ACCEPTED LEVEL 1 
should be recorded in the remarks section. 
 If after the protest being rejected at Level 1 team Captain(s) state their wish to request a Protest 
Protocol at Level 2, the words REJECTED / PENDING LEVEL 1 should be recorded in the remarks 
section. 
 If after the protest being accepted at Level 1 team Captain(s) state their wish to request a Protest 
Protocol at Level 2, the words ACCEPTED / PENDING LEVEL 1 should be recorded in the 
remarks section.   
 If the Protest Protocol is not able to be undertaken (after the relevant FIVB Official was requested 
to enter the field of play), the words PENDING LEVEL 1 shall be recorded in the remarks section. 
 The Referee Coach has the authority to add further information as required in the remarks section 
of the score sheet. 
 The SECOND REFEREE is responsible for checking the score sheet prior to the recommencement 
of play. 
 At the completion of the match, the FIRST REFEREE should ensure that the Remarks section of 
the score sheet has been completed with all the required information as indicated by this protocol.   
 If the Referee Coach (RC) is not present at the court at the completion of the match, the FIRST 
REFEREE must obtain the respective signature prior to the score sheet being delivered to the 
Competition Office, although avoiding any delays for BVIS purposes.  
 
 
6 .  P R O T E S T  P R O T O C O L  L E V E L  2  R E S O L V E D  A F T E R  T H E  
M A T C H  ( b y  t h e  O r g a n i z i n g  C o m m i t t e e ) 
 
6.1 Overview of Procedure 
 The request for a Protest Protocol (Level 2) is commenced by a team Captain(s) formally indicating 
his / her wish to protest at Level 2 based on either: 
1. The Protest Protocol was not initiated at Level 1 (no FIVB Official available).  
2.  The Protest was rejected at Level 1 by the relevant FIVB Delegate(s).  
3. The Protest was accepted at Level 1 by the relevant FIVB Delegate(s) but subsequently 
challenged by the other team Captain. 
4. Events after the completion of the match. 
 
 A Protest Protocol Level 2 must (except in the case of events after a match) relate to protests that 
were correctly requested and recorded under Level 1 of the Protest Protocol by either Captain in 
the respective team.  
 The process of confirmation of a Protest Protocol Level 2 involves the following stages: 
1. Initial recording on the score sheet of the basis of Protest (Level 2) 
2. Payment of the concerned bond (see FIVB Beach Volleyball Handbook) 
3. Organizing Committee reviewing basis for Protest 
4. Conveying of results of the Protest to all parties including explanation of the basis of the 
decision 
5. If appropriate corrective action to replay the match. 
 
 
--- Page 39 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 38 
 
6.2 Who evaluates the protest? 
 The Technical Delegate will request that the Organizing Committee be convened whose 
membership and procedure to be followed is defined by the FIVB Beach Volleyball Handbook. 
 The Referee Coach is not a member of the protest Committee. 
 The Referee Coach may be required to advise the protest Committee on the Rules of the Game. 
 The Referee Coach (or the Technical Delegate) may be required to summarise the Level 1 Protest 
Protocol rejected or accepted plus appropriate facts relating the criteria for the decision. 
 
6.3 How is the Protest Protocol commenced? 
 The Level 2 protest is commenced by the team Captain wishing to Protest, at the end of the match 
and before signing the score sheet, confirming this fact in writing in its remarks section. 
 It is not necessary for the team Captain to write the details of the protest. The protest may be 
written by any party but must finally be signed by the Captain of the appropriate team. 
 The match officials must not prevent or dictate the content of the Protest. 
 The Protest should desirably be recorded in the Working Language of the FIVB: English. 
 The Protest Protocol (Level 2) is accompanied by the payment of a bond as ruled by the FIVB 
Beach Volleyball Sport Operations Manual. 
 
6.4 The process of the Protest Protocol 
 The process of the Protest Committee considering the Protest is governed by the FIVB Beach 
Volleyball Sport Operations Manual. 
 The score sheet may have a linking statement to other document regarding the protest (if 
insufficient space exists). This document is to be presented to the FIVB Technical Delegate no 
later than 30 minutes after the end of the match. 
 The Captain of the team not involved in the protest must be informed immediately verbally by the 
FIRST REFEREE if a Protest (Level 2) is confirmed in writing in the remarks section of the score 
sheet. 
 
 
7 .  F I V B  O F F I C I A L  R E P O R T S 
 
 The Referee Coach at Level 1 and the Organizing Committee at Level 2, must write a report stating 
the basis for the decision and confirming the process undertaken (BVB / Refereeing Coach’s 
Protest Protocol Report, supplied in digital format). 
 A copy of the score sheet shall be attached to the Report. 
 The Referee Coach Report should be included in the Technical Delegates report to the FIVB. 
 The Referee Coach BVB/25 report to the FIVB Beach Volleyball Referees Commissioner should 
include comments on the number and the nature of Protests undertaken, the key issues and 
outcomes and a copy of their Report. 
 The Referee Coach must, as soon as possible after a match where a Protest Protocol was 
“Rejected at Level 1”, supply the Technical Delegate with a copy of their report and the relevant 
score sheet. This report and score sheet allows the Technical Delegate to immediately convene a 
meeting with the relevant team(s) for confirming the application of the relevant sanction fee (bond). 
See FIVB Beach Volleyball Sport Operations Manual.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 40 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 39 
 
 
1S T R E F E R E E  V E R B A L  C O M M U N I C A T I O N  W I T H  T H E  A U D I E N C E  P R O T O C O L   
 
To be implemented at FIVB, World and Official Competitions at the Centre Court. Mandatory at the FIVB 
Senior World Championships and recommended at the Volleyball World Beach Pro Tour Elite 16 and Pro 
Tour Finals. It can also be implemented at the Beach Pro Tour Challenge tournaments whenever agreed 
by the relevant parties (FIVB and Organizers).  
 
1 .  F O R E W O R D  
 
 The FIVB has decided to implement a new procedure allowing the FIRST REFEREE to clarify 
decisions for the spectators. The aim is to clarify the implementation of the Rules of the Game and 
allow the audience to better understand and identify any controversial or relevant decisions. 
 Any discussion between the REFEREE and the Players will remain exclusively personal and 
internal for stadium purposes. With regards to TV, the producer will retain the ability to decide what 
to put on air (the producer may also directly ask for the REFEREE’s explanation when they think 
required). 
 
2 .  F R O M  T H E  P E R S P E C T I V E  O F  T H E  O R G A N I Z E R S  
 
 Provide the FIRST REFEREE at the Centre Court with a wireless lapel microphone either equipped 
with a switch on/off button or with sound control operated by the DJ/Announcer. The sound quality 
of the system must be of good standard and duly tested in advance by the Referee Coach.  
 This microphone should be connected with the stadium sound system and duly coordinated with 
the announcer/DJ mixing table. 
 The Announcer and DJ must be well aware of the procedures and objectives of the procedure in 
order to allow the FIRST REFEREE the possibility to get on air whenever required (this is to be 
coordinated well in advance by the Referee Coach). 
 The process of the communication is to be led by the REFEREE, not the DJ or the Announcers. It 
should be the REFEREE deciding that he/she wishes to address the spectators and not the 
Announcer asking for his/her opinion. It is nevertheless possible that the Announcer creates some 
atmosphere around the announcement (i.e. saying something such as “let us find out what the 
FIRST REFEREE has to tell us about his decision”, etc). 
 Communication language used may eventually be the host country language in case the FIRST 
REFEREE has a good level of communication in this language. Short English translation by the 
announcer may be required in this case. The same may apply in the opposite sense (English 
communication by the REFEREE being briefly translated by the Announcer into the host 
language).    
 
3 .  F R O M  T H E  P E R S P E C T I V E  O F  T H E  R E F E R E E S  
 
 REFEREES must be effective communicators. These skills are at the top of the main 
characteristics shared by them. They usually communicate more non-verbally than they do through 
words. 
 Verbal communication is currently used by REFEREES to convey messages to players, fellow 
officials, etc. With this specific procedure, REFEREES will be required to add to their usual 
communication format (i.e. hand signals), through the use of verbal communication with the 
audience. 
 As individuals, REFEREES all have different personality traits and different ways of doing things. 
Despite the fact that they can’t do much to change this, it will still be required to control their look, 
manner of speaking, and posture, in order to appropriately present themselves for this new role. 
This will be important as they will be dealing with qualified and extensive media and TV coverage 
at the main arena of some of our most visible events. 
 
“what you say” 
- When you are required to verbally explain your decision, first it is very important to think 
about the messages you are sending out and to make sure they are consistent with the 
non-verbal communication previously expressed through the official gestures used, your 
posture, your facial expression, etc. 
--- Page 41 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 40 
 
- Your officiating requires deep comprehension of Beach Volleyball; regulations, technical 
knowledge, and a feel for the spirit of the game. When you provide an explanation to the 
audience, show sound knowledge of the regulations and base yourself on the language of 
our sport’s discipline, but always keep it clear and simple. 
 
“how you say” 
- Then you will have to think about how you say it. The tone of voice you will use will send a 
message itself. Be in control of your feelings during the game and learn how to use your 
voice to fit the situation. A loud voice may convey confidence, firmness, etc, but it may also 
convey abuse of authority. A soft voice may convey trust, understanding, but it may also 
convey lack of confidence, etc; it will all depend on how you will fit to the environment and 
situation. 
- You will have also to assess the way you speak, if you do it clearly, quickly or slowly, 
friendly or aggressively, etc. 
 
“when you do it” 
- While running the coin toss (either at the start of the game or between sets 2 and 3), the 
REFEREE is required to announce the result. It is understood that this announcement is 
only relevant if made immediately following the coin toss (or even live and possibly on the 
stadium video wall if applicable). Announcements made right before the first service of the 
set are useless whilst also looking quite unprofessional. REFEREES should use common 
sense and not overlap with the entertainment or video board commercials that obviously 
have priority. 
- At a decision that in your own opinion requires further clarification to the audience (i.e.: 
after a ball mark protocol, etc), or at a rule interpretation/application that has been 
questioned for clarification by any of the team Captains.   
- More often communication is required. In accordance to the concept that inspired this 
procedure, the REFEREE must address the spectators about the nature and rational of the 
call (or no call) made. A “script for verbal communication with the audience” follows.  
 
“how you do it” 
- Listen to the Captain’s request for clarification. First deal with him/her directly, explaining 
your decision and/or issuing the appropriate warning or misconduct sanction if required. 
- Only after this should you start your verbal explanation to the crowd, opening your 
microphone immediately before commencing. 
- Your verbal explanation must clarify the prior decision that led to the request for 
clarification by the Captain, and any further action that you might have taken from then on. 
- It must be communicated in good English and accurate technical terminology. 
 
 
4 .  F R O M  T H E  P E R S P E C T I V E  O F  T H E  R E F E R E E  C O A C H  
 
 Referee Coaches at the events where this procedure may apply will be responsible to coordinate 
all arrangements and instruct procedures to REFEREES, DJs, announcers, etc. 
 The Referee Coach should test the characteristics and quality of the sound system, including the 
referee microphone prior to the start of the event. 
 A visual signal by the FIRST REFEREE that the production team could identify easily should be 
established to indicate that the referee wants to speak. The recommended signal is to place the 
right arm across the chest with the open hand pointing towards the shoulder. 
 Referee Coaches should also very carefully select the REFEREES who have the best profile and 
the minimum required English communication skills, in order to assign them for the matches where 
this procedure will apply. 
 Finally, they are required to include any comments in their final BVB/25 report, based on relevant 
feedback collected from all parties concerned (audience, referees, players, TV, media, DJs, 
announcers, organizers, etc). 
 
 
--- Page 42 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 41 
 
 
5 .  S C R I P T  F O R  V E R B A L  C O M M U N I C A T I O N  W I T H  A U D I E N C E  
  
To be utilised in accordance with “First Referee Verbal Communication with the Audience”, above.  
 
 
5 . 1  R E S U L T  O F  T H E  C O I N  T O S S  
 
 Good morning / afternoon / evening Ladies and Gentlemen. 
 Team XXX will serve on my right/left hand side. 
 Let’s play! 
 
 
5 . 2  R E S U L T  O F  T H E  B A L L  M A R K  P R O T O C O L  
 
 I have reviewed the ball mark and the ball is in/out. 
 I have reviewed the ball mark and the mark is unavailable. The ball is in/out (with the referee 
decision standing), or the rally is replayed (if this was a Referee BMP). 
 
 
5 . 3  M E D I C A L  A S S I S T A N C E  /  F O R F E I T 
 
 A Medical Time-Out / Recovery Interruption / has been initiated for Player number 1/2 from Team 
XXX. He / She will be given a maximum of 5 minutes to recover and resume play. 
 At the conclusion of the recovery time the player is unable to continue, XXX team forfeits the match 
due to being incomplete. 
 
 
5 . 4  B A L L  H A N D L I N G   
 
 Hard driven ball: the attack was judged as a “hard driven ball”, hence the play was allowed to 
continue. 
 Note: setting overhand with fingers is not subject to discussion. Use only official hand signals. 
 
 
5 . 5  I N T E R F E R E N C E    
 
 Interference: Player number 1/2 from Team XXX prevented the opponent from playing the ball – so 
is judged to have interfered. 
 No interference: Although player number 1/2 from Team XXX did cross into the opponent’s space, 
this did not interfere with the ability of Team YYY to play the ball. 
 
 
5 . 6  C O N T A C T  W I T H  T H E  N E T   
 
 Contact with the net was not judged a fault, since:  
(choose the correct option) )  
- The ball was on the sand beforehand 
- The player contacted the net outside the antennas and did not interfere with play 
- The player was not in the action of playing the ball  
 
 Double fault: As both players touched the net at the same time, the rally is replayed. 
 
 
5 . 7  W A R N I N G S  A N D  SA N C T I O N S   
 
 Minor misconduct:  the yellow card issued to player number 1/2 Team XXX is a warning. This 
warning is not a sanction but a symbol that the team has reached the sanctioning level for the 
match. 
 Rude conduct:  the red card issued to player number 1/2 Team XXX is a penalty. The result is a 
point and service for the opponent. 
--- Page 43 ---
REFEREEING GUIDELINES 
AND INSTRUCTIONS 
 
 
2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball Refereeing Coach’s Manual – Appendix 1 
Page 42 
 
 Second Rude conduct in the set: the red card issued to player number 1/2 Team XXX is a penalty. 
The result is a point and service for the opponent. This athlete has reached his/her limit for 
penalties in this set, and the next time he/she is sanctioned for Rude conduct he/she will be 
expelled for the reminder of the set.  
 Delay warning: the yellow card issued to Team XXX for delaying the game is a warning for the 
remainder of the match. 
 Delay penalty: the red card issued to Team XXX for repeatedly delaying the game results in a point 
and service for the opponent. 
 
 
5 . 8  A D D I T I O N A L  N O T E S  
 
 Any situation not mentioned in this script should be explained by keeping the explanation simple 
and straight forward while at the same time trying to ensure that the basic rule application is also 
covered. 
 
 Please note that where you see “Team XXX” should be replaced by the name of the country when 
addressing the crowd. 
 
 
IMPORTANT: For additional information on the 2022-2023 FIVB Beach Volleyball, or FIVB Beach 
Volleyball - sanctioned events, please go to the FIVB web site: http://www.fivb.com/EN/BeachVolleyball/  
 
 
 
 