 
OFFICIAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 2 
Index 
 
Page  Topic of Rulings  Cases   
     
3 PREFACE    
4 PART I   - THEORETICAL PRINCIPLES OF APPLICATON    
5 -52 PART II   - CASES    
5 -7 CHAPTER 1 - FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT    
5 -6 Playing area 1.1.1 1.1.9    
6  Net and posts 1.2.1 1.2.3   
7  Ball 1.3.1 1.3.4   
8 -10 CHAPTER 2 - PARTICPANTS    
8  Teams 2.1.1 2.1.2   
8 -9 Players Equipment 2.2.1 2.2.7   
9 -10 Rights and Responsibilities of the Participants 2.3.1 2.3.6   
11 CHAPTER 3 - POINT, SET AND MATCH WINNER 
 
   
11 Scoring System 3.1.1 3.1.2   
12 -13 CHAPTER 4 - PREPARATION OF THE MATCH, STRUCTURE OF PLAY    
12 Preparation of the match 4.1.1 4.1.3   
12 -13 Team Line up /Players Positions 4.2.1    
14 -24 CHAPTER 5 - PLAYING ACTIONS    
14 -15 States of play 5.1.1 5.1.8   
15 -16 Playing faults 5.2.1    
16 -18 Playing the ball 5.3.1 5.3.12   
18 Ball at the net 5.4.1 5.4.2   
18 -21 Player at the net 5.5.1 5.5.11   
21 -23 Service 5.6.1 5.6.11   
23 -24 Attack hit 5.7.1 5.7.4   
24 -25 
25 
Block 5.8.1 5.8.3   
26 -33 CHAPTER 6 - TIME OUTS AND DELAYS    
26 -27 Time outs 6.1.1 6.1.7   
27 -28 Delays to the Game 6.2.1 6.2.6    
28 -33 Exceptional Game Interruptions 6.3.1 6.3.12   
33 -33 Court Switches and Intervals 6.4.1 6.4.2   
34 -36 CHAPTER 7 - MISCONDUCT    
34 Minor Misconduct 7.1.1 7.1.3   
34 -36 Misconduct leading to sanctions 7.2.1 7.2.10   
37 -40 CHAPTER 8 - REFEREES    
37 -38 Refereeing Team and Procedures 8.1.1    8.1.2   
38 -39 First Referee 8.2.1 8.2.5   
39 -40 Second Referee 8.3.1 8.3.5   
40  Scorer and assistant scorer 8.4.1 8.4.2   
41 Line Judges 8.5.1 8.5.2   
41 Official’s signals 8.6.1 8.6.3   
42 -46 CHAPTER 9 - SPECIAL CASES 9.1 9.19   
47 -54 CHAPTER 10 - SCORERS’ CASES 10.1 10.29   
55 -59 PART III - TERMINOLOGY    
 

 
 3 
Preface 
 
Beach Volleyball is a great game – just ask the millions of people who play it, watch it, analyze it and 
referee it. It has been actively promoted in recent years and has developed tremendously as a top 
competitive sport. 
Increased excitement, speed, explosive action, a clean healthy image and huge TV audience figures 
have created an impetus to develop the game even further, to make it simpler, fairer, and more 
attractive to an even wider range of viewing public. 
However, to make a correct and uniform application of these rules on a world stage is also very 
important for the further development of the game. This Beach Casebook is a collection of plays 
with Official Rulings  approved by the FIVB Rules of the Game and Refereeing Commission and is 
based upon the most up -to-date edition of the Rules. The Rules themselves provide a mere 
framework within which we play the game. These  rulings expand on and clarify the spirit and 
meaning of the Official Rules and are the official interpretations to be followed during all sanctioned 
competitions. 
This edition is shorter than the previous Casebook but is nevertheless based upon the new 2025-28 
edition of the Rules text whose mandate was approved by the 39th FIVB World Congress, in 2024. 
 
 
 
Guillermo Paredes, 
President, FIVB Rules of the Game and Refereeing Commission  
  

 
 4 
 
PART I – THEORETICAL PRINCIPLES OF APPLICATION 
 
The referee is the one who puts the rules into practice. For the correct application of the rules, the  
referees have to  know the rules faultlessly and apply them decisively and correctly within the 
context of the game. Rule 22.2.3 states: "The referee has the power to decide any matter involving 
the game, including those not provided for in the rules". Only on the basis of full understanding 
about why the rule was created can this be done successfully. 
Remember the referee stays in the background but at the same time acts to promote the game in 
the best  light, and in this way the game is attractive to a wider audience. 
We want the game to be popular – making an attractive show is the way to do that. 
 
 
THE RULES FOR THE CASEBOOK 2025 EDITION 
 
The Casebook is a reflection of  the rules, which were put into effect by a succession of FIVB  
Congresses. While other rules and procedure changes are always likely to be considered, in order to 
make the game more attractive, as the sport and its society changes, it is worth remembering that 
the rulings shown here are  those relating to the rules in force  today (FIVB Official Beach Volleyball 
Rules 2025-2028).  
In each new/updated edition of the BVB Casebook, we shall continue to add new relevant cases as 
we identify them throughout the competition season. This 2025 version has no new cases, yet two 
revised cases (5.5.11 and 9.11). It also has a new video for the case 5.5.11.  
However please note, where we have official rules that are identical across the two disciplines of 
Beach Volleyball and Volleyball, you may also reference and leverage the relevant case in the 
Volleyball Casebook, and apply it for Beach Volleyball. 
The 202 5 version of the Casebook provides some very interesting and important examples 
showcasing the importance of following protocols and procedures, as well as applying common 
sense and the rules as they apply in different situations.  
It also provides links to videos to better showcase the case and example, the videos can be accessed 
by clicking on the respective link where available: 
 
 Click Here for Video 
New videos and links may be added to this online Casebook throughout the year. 

 
 5 
PART II – CASES  
 
 
 
PLAYING AREA 
 
1.1.1  
If, during the match, a player finds a dangerous  
object under the sand, must the referee stop the 
game and allow the court to be checked before play 
is resumed? 
Ruling 
Yes, the safety of the players should always prevail. 
 
 
Rules 1.2.1, 1.2.3, D1a, D1b, D2 
1.1.2  
Is the referee allowed to delay a match if any 
metal anchors are used in the corners of the court, 
and metal wires secure the post and the net? 
Ruling 
Yes. During pre -match inspection he/ she  should 
always consider the safety of the players. 
Rules 1.2.1, 1.2.3, 1.3.2, D1a, D1b, D2 
1.1.3  
If a player, during play, pulled a court line so that 
one of the anchors came loose, should the referee 
stop the play? 
Ruling 
Yes, the 1st Referee should immediately whistle  
and call a replay because the court does not comply 
with Rule 1.1.1. - all items should be fixed  before 
play is resumed. 
Rule 1.1.1 
1.1.4  
A player injures himself by contact with an anchor, 
so that he is unable to continue  playing. What 
should the referee have done in advance to prevent 
the situation in the first place? 
Ruling 
The referees in their pre -match inspection of the 
court should have found this potential danger to the 
players and should have resolved the problem. 
Rules 1.2.1, 1.3.2 
1.1.5  
Is it allowed for a captain to complain to the first  
referee that the court should be correctly raked and 
levelled to prevent danger to both teams? 
Ruling 
Yes, the captain has the right to ask the referee. The 
referee should initially verify the accuracy of  the 
team’s request, allowing the raking to take place,  if 
the inspection reveals that the captain’s complaint 
is justified. 
Rule 1.2.1 
1.1.6  
A player who is going to serve is standing between  
signage that is not completely surrounding the 
court. Can the referee authorize the service, while 
the player is standing outside the line of signage? 
Ruling 
No, the 1st Referee must not authorise service  but 
should insist that the player moves inside the line 
of the signage. 
Rules 1.1.1, 1.1.2 
1.1.7  
During heavy rain, both captains request the  1st 
Referee to stop play. What should the referee do? 
Ruling 
In Beach Volleyball, the decision to stop playing is 
made by the Tournament Organising Committee.  
Only if they are unavailable and the referee foresees 
a significant danger to the players from lightning, or 
sudden wind gusts, can he/ she stop play and ask  
the players to go to their benches. 
 Rules 22.2.3, 22.2.5, Ref Guidelines & Instructions  
                                  CHAPTER 1 – FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT 

 
 6 
1.1.8  
A captain, after the 1st Referee  declines his 
request to water the courts before the match, 
later takes a watering hose by himself and starts  
watering the court on his side. What should be the 
reaction of the 1st Referee? 
Ruling 
At first the 1st Referee could have asked for  the 
Technical Delegate to make a decision before the 
match. During the match any watering of the  court 
can be dealt with by the referee within the  time 
between sets / timeout / Technical Timeout , but it 
should be conducted so as not to delay the match , 
and should benefit both teams equally. 
The player should be sanctioned (assuming no prior 
delay sanctions) initially for ignoring the requests of 
the referees (Delay Warning) and then  
subsequently for delaying the match by watering 
the court (Delay Penalty). 
Rules 18.2.2, 18.2.3, 22.2.3, 22.2.5, Referee 
Guidelines  and Instructions 
1.1.9  
Can a captain protest to the 1st Referee about the 
heat of the sand during the game, and does the 1 st 
Referee have to accept such a protest? 
 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee should have done his/ her utmost 
to prevent the need for a Protest Protocol in such a 
situation. He should have assessed the sand 
conditions making his own judgment about the 
playing conditions.  
If he and the team agree that the playing conditions 
are too difficult, he should ask the TS to authorize a 
short interruption for watering the court. 
                                         Rules 1.1, 1.3, 5.1.2, 5.1.2.2  
 
 
NET AND POSTS 
 
1.2.1  
Can a captain, during the warm up, ask the referee 
to verify the net height and tension? 
Ruling 
Yes, he can  ask and the referees should quickly  
check the net again. 
Rule 22.2.5, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
1.2.2  
What should a referee do, if a captain, during a 
match, tells him that the net is too low, and requests 
him to check the net? 
Ruling 
The referees should check the net, ask the court 
manager to correct it, if necessary, and continue the 
match. 
   Rule 22.2.5, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
1.2.3  
If a 1st Referee is wired up with TV microphones 
and earpieces, and it would delay the game if he 
should come down from his chair to conduct the 
toss between the 2nd and 3rd set, can this toss 
be conducted by the 2d referee? 
Ruling 
Yes, the 2nd Referee can conduct the 3rd set coin 
toss. The 1st referee should explain the situation at 
the first coin toss, and ask the relevant Technical 
Delegate for his permission to authorize it. 
Rules 7.1, 22.3.1.2, 23.2.9, Referee Guidelines  
and Instructions 
 

 
 7 
 
BALL 
 
1.3.1   
If, at a tournament, 10 playing courts are used, and  
if there is a lack of balls and auxiliary officials, can  
the 1-ball system be used on some courts? 
Ruling 
Yes, with the permission of the  Tournament 
Technical Delegate and with a clear explanation to 
the players involved about what to do with the ball 
in between rallies. 
                                                                             Rule 3.3 
1.3.2  
If in a Tournament the temperature is very high, is 
a captain in that case allowed to ask the 1st Referee 
to check the ball pressure? 
Ruling 
Yes, the 1st Referee should request that the  2nd 
Referee checks the ball, because if the ball is 
exposed to direct sunlight for long periods, it would 
significantly alter its pressure. 
Rule 1.5, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
1.3.3  
What should a referee do if the ball is getting  wet 
during play? 
Ruling 
Referees must ensure that the ball does not get  
very wet or moist, thus altering its pressure and 
weight. So, a second set of balls should be available 
for each set. 
Rules 3.1, 3.2 
1.3.4 
If, during a match the 2nd Referee notices that 5  
match balls are being used, what should be his/her  
reaction? 
Ruling 
It is clearly the 2nd Referee’s responsibility to  
oversee the process of utilization of match balls.  
The 2nd
 
Referee should: 
1) initially check that four match balls are ready  to 
be used at the start of the match; 
2) a lways ensure that a minimum of 1  suitable 
reserve ball is available, so he/she should take  1 
match ball back on to the table. 
Rule 3.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 8 
 
 
 
TEAMS  
 
2.1.1  
What should a 1st Referee do, if he/she sees that a 
team is delaying the game by not immediately 
returning to the court because the players are 
talking to their coach, who is outside the free zone? 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee should sanction the team with a  
delay warning or penalty (as appropriate). He 
should also request the Technical Delegate to come 
to the side of  the court to investigate the issue of  
coaching. 
Rule 4.1.4 
2.1.2  
If a captain asks the referee to pay attention to  the 
fact that the other team is being coached,  what 
should be the action of the 1st Referee? 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee should request that the Technical 
Delegate come to the side of the court. 
Rule 4.1.4, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
 
 
PLAYERS EQUIPMENT  
 
2.2.1  
Is a player allowed to play wearing a ring containing 
a sharp diamond? 
Ruling 
No, the player must remove the ring, or have it  
taped to prevent any potential injury caused by the 
sharp diamond. 
Rule 4.5 
2.2.2  
If the 1st Referee notices that both teams are  
wearing the same coloured playing uniforms, what  
should he/she do? 
 
Reference: Case 10.2 
Ruling 
The referee should try to get a solution by talking 
to both team captains and if necessary, conduct a  
coin toss. If the problem is not solved, he should 
inform the Technical Delegate. 
Rule 4. 4  
2.2.3  
If the 1st Referee is asked by a player if he can play 
with u n d e r-shorts due to a medical injury, is the 
1st referee allowed to permit this? 
Ruling 
It is not necessary to ask for the 1 st referee’s 
approval to play with under -shorts. According to 
new regulations about player's uniforms, players 
are free to use long sleeve/leggings at their 
preference, with the partners not being obliged to 
the same. No additional provisions including min 
temperate etc. shall be set as pre -conditions. 
Athletes of same team are not obliged to wear long 
sleeve/leggings at the same match. 
However, if both athletes of the same team choose 
to wear long sleeve/leggings at the same match, 
then the uniform shall be of the same style and 
colour.  
Rule 4.4.3 
                                                CHAPTER 2 – PARTICIPANTS 

 
 9 
2.2.4  
If a player’s shorts accidentally become badly  torn 
during the match, is it permitted for the 1st Referee 
to allow the player to replace the shorts with a 
matching pair, without significant delay to the  
match. 
Ruling 
Yes, the 1st Referee is allowed to do this. The 
teams would not be charged a time out or delay  
sanction. 
 
 
Rule 4.4.2 
2.2.5  
Is it allowed to play wearing a watch? 
Ruling 
Yes, players can play wearing a watch. 
Rule 4.5.1, Decision of the FIVB 
2.2.6 
Can a player play with sand socks? 
Ruling 
Yes, upon request to the 1st Referee the players are 
allowed to wear footwear of various types including 
socks, rubber booties or shoes. 
Rules 4.3.2, 4.4.1, Ref Guidelines and Instructions 
2.2.7 
What should a referee do, if he/she finds out that 2 
players are wearing numbers not corresponding  to 
the ones on the score sheet? 
 
 
Reference: Case 10.2 
Ruling 
He should let this be corrected by changing 
quickly one or a combination of the uniforms. No 
penalty shall apply. 
The score remains the same and the respective 
serving team will recommence the match. 
Rule 4.4 
 
 
RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PARTICIPANTS  
 
 
2.3.1   
Can a captain ask the 1st Referee to request that 
the Line Judge repeats his signal? 
Ruling 
Yes, the captain may request to speak to the  1st 
Referee and then may request an explanation of 
the interpretation of the call. 
The referee must respond to the request and the  
line judge may be asked to repeat the flag signal. 
Rule 5.1.2.1 
2.3.2  
If a clear misinterpretation of the rules by the  1st 
Referee occurs, can the captain ask for an  
explanation of the decision of the referee? 
Ruling 
Yes, the 1st Referee should repeat and explain  the 
decision to the captain using the official hand  
signals, if appropriate. 
If the captain does not accept this explanation, 
he/she may state his intention to protest under 
the Protest Protocol regulations. The 1st Referee 
must determine whether the request satisfies the 
criteria for a  protest and, if so, does not have the 
right to refuse the  team’s protest  and must 
institute the Protocol and call the Referee Coach. 
Rule 5.1.2.1, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 

 
 10 
2.3.3  
What should the referee do, if he/she wants  to 
initiate a Ball Mark Protocol and the player  wipes 
away the ball mark? 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee is not able to decide if the ball is in  
or out. 
He should sanction the player involved immediately 
under the Misconduct scale (red card). 
Rule 20.2.1, 20.3.1 
2.3.4  
What should the 1st Referee do, if a player, after  
his/her decision (“in” or “out”), re -aligns the line 
that he previously moved in his playing action? 
Ruling 
If the referee thinks that the player is trying to cover 
up a fault, he can give the player the  relevant 
warning/sanction. 
Rules 20.1, 20.2 
2.3.5  
What should be the reaction of the 1st Referee if a 
captain questions the referee’s ability to  make 
decisions and his/her neutrality? 
Ruling 
A referee should always answer all questions in  a 
professional manner and show good judgment as to 
what behavior is or is not acceptable. The 1st 
Referee should not allow such behavior. The referee 
should, where possible, utilise  verbal warnings, 
followed by  a formal warning (yellow card), and 
then as appropriate consider the use of misconduct 
penalties. 
Rules 20.1, 20.2, 20.3 
2.3.6  
If a team captain walks away from the court 
directly after the match and does not sign the score 
sheet, what should the 1st referee do to complete 
the score sheet? 
Reference: Case 10.3 
Ruling 
To complete the score sheet the 1st Referee must 
note this fact at the Remarks Section of the  score 
sheet before addressing the issue to the Referee 
Coach. 
Rule 5.1.3.1, Score sheet Instructions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 11 
 
 
 
SCORING SYSTEM   
 
3.1.1  
What procedures should the 1st Referee follow to  
record on the score sheet a default based on a 
medical injury that happens before the start of the  
match? 
 
 
Reference: Case 10.4 
Ruling 
Both referees should make sure that the score sheet 
is completed with all the details required, noting the 
cause of this default in the remarks section of  the 
score sheet. It is not necessary to conduct a coin  
toss, or warm up period. Both teams should sign the 
score sheet verifying the result. 
The 1st Referee must call the official medical staff 
to the court and inform all players,  relevant 
Technical Delegate (s), tournament organisers and 
officials of the situation regarding the default. The 
1st Referee remains in overall control of the 
recording of the default proceedings on the score  
sheet. 
Rule 6.4, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
3.1.2  
What action should a referee take to confirm the 
service order of the teams in the 2nd set? 
Ruling 
The referee should:  
1) initially ask the team that lost the coin toss before 
the 1st set for its decision. 
2) ask the other team for its decision based  on the 
remaining alternatives. These two steps should 
determine the team to  serve and the respective 
sides of the court. 
3) additionally, the referees should  determine the 
teams’ service order. 
Rule 7.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  CHAPTER 3 – POINT, SET AND MATCH WINNER 

 
 12 
 
 
 
PREPARATION OF THE MATCH 
 
4.1.1  
After winning the coin toss, can a captain ask to 
return to the court to determine which side  to 
choose? 
 
Reference: Case 10.6 
Ruling 
This is acceptable as long as the decision is  made 
quickly and allows the scorer enough time to be  
ready to commence the match at the end of the  
official warm up period. 
Rule 7.1 
4.1.2  
Can a player ask the 1st Referee for permission to go 
to the toilet / bathroom, at the end of the official  
warm up? 
Ruling 
Yes; however, if a player delays the normal  
sequence of the game while using the toilets, a 
medical time- out will be assigned to this  
team/player. 
Upon a request by a player to use the toilets,  
his/her team must be advised that the 1st Referee 
will start the counting of a medical time -out to be 
assigned to the relevant player once the time 
before the start of the match, or the duration of the 
regular stoppage (TO, TTO, interval, 12” between 
rallies), has been exhausted. 
Unless a reserve referee is involved in the game, the 
2nd Referee must always accompany the player  
while the 1st Referee will supervise the situation 
close to the scorer’s table. 
Rule 17.1.2, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
4.1.3  
When the warm up courts are aligned in a 
different direction when compared to than the 
playing court, are the  players allowed to ask for a 
formal 5 minutes warm up  instead of the regular 3 
minutes? 
Ruling 
This should have been decided by the Organising 
Committee and communicated by the Technical 
Delegate to all parties before the start of the  
competition. 
However, if this not the case, the referee  should 
accept this request as there is  a substantial 
difference in the conditions from the match court  
and the warm up court. Players should be allowed 
time to utilise the match court in order to 
acclimatize to the new conditions. 
Rule 7.2  
 
TEAM LINE UP / PLAYERS POSITIONS 
 
4.2.1  
If the scorer finds out before the start of the 1st set, 
that the service order is different from what the  
Ruling 
The scorer should immediately draw the  referee’s 
attention to the fact that the score sheet  states 
             CHAPTER 4 – PREPARATION OF THE MATCH, STRUCTURE OF PLAY 
PLAYPLAY 

 
 13 
score sheet indicates, what should he/she do? 
 
 
Reference: Case 10.5 
another service order. 
Initially the referees must check the score sheet  to 
determine its correctness. If there is any possibility  
of an error in the communication or recording of  
the service order, this should be corrected and  the 
relevant player should be allowed to serve. 
A referee should generally accept the decision of 
the players as it does not change the nature of the 
match substantially and no comparative advantage 
is gained. 
Rules 7.3, 7.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 14 
 
 
STATES OF PLAY 
 
5.1.1  
How should both referees signal the  following 
situation? 
During a match the ball is disputed at the net with 
a series of quick play actions. It is unclear who  
touches the ball last. After these actions the ball 
lands outside the sideline near the 2nd Referee. 
 
Ruling 
The 2nd Referee should initially and very obviously 
move into the side of the team committing the fault 
and using private signals indicate ball in  or out (to 
assist the 1st referee only). The 1st Referee should 
observe the line judge and 2nd  Referee’s signal(s) 
and then signal the team to serve, the nature of the 
fault and, if necessary, the player at fault. 
If the 1st Referee decides that the contact  was 
simultaneous, then the result should be “ball  out”, 
and the fault is against the team on the opposite  
side of the net from where the ball  landed. The 1st 
Referee can indicate the player who last touched 
the ball in a decisive manner. However, referees 
must distinguish between simultaneous and “wipe 
off” actions.                                                      
Rules 9.1.2.2, 21.2.3.1 
5.1.2  
If a ball falls outside a boundary line, and the line is 
not hit, but moves due to the impact of the ball with 
the sand, should the 1st Referee call this ball as 
“in“? 
Ruling 
The referee should call this ball “out”. 
The line moving, although it was not contacted, is 
very common due to the nature of the court surface 
and lines. The referee should be able to give the 
players a precise and correct definition of ball “in” 
clarifying any misinterpretation. 
Referees should be aware that the ball may land 
out, but has struck the line, which is in a raised 
position, on the way out of court. In this case, since 
the ball contacts the line, it must be called “in”. 
Rule 8.3 
5.1.3  
When a ball lands near the line, and the 2nd 
Referee gives a signal to the 1st Referee which is 
different from the line judge signal, what will be 
the proper action by the 1st Referee? 
Ruling 
Ideally the 2nd Referee must not assist with a 
different signal from the line judge unless he/she is 
100% sure, and that being the case, then the 1st 
Referee should follow the 2nd Referee indication. 
However, the 1st Referee should actually, in 
sequence: 
1)  whistle immediately, then  
2) take in all the information from the other 
officials, then 
3) decide, based on what he  / she has seen 
him/herself 
4)  take responsibility for that decision. 
   Rule 8.3, 8.4, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
              CHAPTER 5 – PLAYING ACTIONS 

 
 15 
5.1.4  
A ball comes very close to a line. The line judge  
signals “out”, yet both referees believe that the ball 
touched the line. How should both referees deal 
with this situation?  
 
Click Here for Video 
Ruling 
The 2nd Referee should indicate ball “in” (to assist  
the 1st Referee only). 
The 1st R eferee must overrule the line judge 
(signaling the ball as “in”). 
                                                                             
Rule 8.3 
5.1.5  
What should the referee do if a ball landed  inside 
the line, but obviously the line had been  displaced 
substantially during a previous defending action? 
 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee should have the line corrected, and 
then call the ball “in” or “out”, depending on where 
the ball landed. 
  Rules 8.3, 8.4, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
5.1.6  
What should the referee do if a ball was played  
inside the court, touching the side line but obviously 
the line was minimally displaced during a previous  
defending action? 
 
Ruling 
In this case the 1st
 
Referee should call the ball “in”. 
Small movements of the lines during a rally shall not 
result in the replacement of the line and a 
decision would be made with the line in its position 
at the end of the rally. 
The exception to this would be if the line would  
have been displaced at the very last stages of the 
play. 
  Rules 8.3, 8.4, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
5.1.7  
When a ball crosses the net during service and is 
blown back, due to strong wind, under the net,  
coming back on to the sand on the server’s side, 
what will be the call by the 1st
 
Referee? 
 
Ruling 
This is a very unusual circumstance. The  receiving 
team did, however, have the opportunity to play 
the ball while it was in the space above its playing  
court, the ball having legally travelled through the  
crossing space. Therefore, the point should be 
awarded to the team of the server. 
Rules 10.1.1, 12.6.2.1 
5.1.8 
A team passes the ball partly over the antenna to 
the opponent court on the side of the 2nd
 
Referee. 
Must the 2nd
 
Referee whistle? 
 
 
Ruling 
Yes, a 2nd
 
Referee has within his/her authority the  
right and obligation to whistle and signal this fault 
if this occurs on his/her side of the  court. The line 
judge should at the same moment use the “wave 
and point” signal. Notice the difference if the pass 
travels from the court partly over the antenna to the 
opponent free zone – no whistle or signal is required 
here. 
Rules 10.1.2, 23.3.2.4 
 
PLAYING FAULTS 
 
5.2.1 
In a match the ball is played legally by both  teams 
above the net in a joust (extended contact with the 
Ruling 
The team “A” will serve, because after the joust 
and the ball goes out, the last contact was made by 

 
 16 
ball by opponents), and then lands outside the 
court of Team “A”. Who now has the serve? 
the team on the opposite side from where the  ball 
touched the ground. 
Rules 9.1.2.2, 9.1.2.3, 9.2.2.2 
 
PLAYING THE BALL 
 
5.3.1 
A player chased the ball out of court, then took 
support from the score table to return the ball to his 
partner. The contact with the ball was over the end 
of the score table which was on the opponent’s side 
of the net. The 1 st referee took no action and 
allowed play to continue. Did the player have the 
right to play the ball from this position?   
Ruling 
Yes. This was a very spectacular action.  
According to the rule text, the ball may be retrieved 
from over the complete length of the score table, 
even the part on the side of the opponent. So this 
was a legal play and the 1 st referee was correct to 
allow the rally to continue. 
Rule 9 
5.3.2 
When, in a match, a ball was slightly touched by the 
player and the 1st referee didn’t see it, what 
should he/she do anyway to be sure that after this 
ball 2 or 3 contacts are permitted?  
Click Here for Video 
Ruling 
The referee should always have eye contact  with 
his/her 2nd
 
Referee and line judges, to see if they  
are helping with their signals before making a  
judgment call. 
Rules 14.1.3, 14.4.1 
5.3.3 
If a referee judges a service ball as a hard driven  
ball, and allows the receiving player an extended  
contact overhand with fingers (catch), can the 
captain of  the serving team complain to the  
referee? 
Ruling 
Yes, he/she can - the service is a specific exception  
to the rules that define a hard driven ball. It is illegal 
to receive a served ball in this way. If the player  
contacts the ball overhand with fingers, (i.e., setting 
the ball) this contact must be  clean (not double 
contact or catch). 
Rules 9.2.2, 9.2.2.1, 9.2.2.2, 9.2.2.4, 9.3.3, 9.3.4 
5.3.4 
Can a player complete a set from any  possible 
position?  
 
Click Here for Video 
 
Ruling 
The referee must consider only the rules. The  
referee should not consider the player’s position 
prior to, during or after the set. A player can  
potentially complete a legal set from any position. 
Rule 9.2, Refereeing Guidelines and Instructions 
5.3.5 
What should be considered as a hard driven 
attack ball, coming from the opponent side? 
 
Click Here for Video 1 
 
Click Here for Video 2 
 
Ruling 
The referee should consider if it is a hard driven  
attack as follows: 
 
1) does the player have time to change his/  her 
technique? 
2) the time and distance between the attack and the 
defensive action 
3) did the speed of the ball change due to a block or 
hitting the net? 
4) is the action offensive or defensive in nature? 
Rule 9.2.2.1 

 
 17 
5.3.6 
Is it allowed for a player to play a hard driven  
defence ball, if the ball is slightly touched by the 
block, without the speed or direction of the ball  
being altered? 
Ruling 
Yes. Although this contact is the second contact of  
the team, it is legal to play the ball in this way.  The 
referee must be sure that the ball still satisfies  the 
criteria of a hard driven ball especially regarding the 
time the defensive player has to change his/  her 
technique of playing the ball. 
Rules 9.2.2.1, 9.2.3.2, 9.3.3, 9.3.4 
5.3.7 
Is it allowed for a player to play a hard driven 
defence ball, if the ball touched the top of the 
net and the speed of the ball was significantly 
reduced? 
Ruling 
No. Because in this situation the ball has  
substantially changed its speed and therefore the 
ball is now not hard driven, so it is a CATCH fault. 
Rules 9.2.2.1, 9.3.3 
5.3.8 
Because of heavy wind, the players are attacking  
the ball in standing position. Is it allowed to defend  
these attacks with the hard driven ball defence  
manner? (i.e., slightly extended contact, overhand 
with fingers) 
 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee must particularly focus on the time 
the player had to change his/ her technique in 
playing the ball. Did he/she have enough time to 
change the technique from being defensive to being 
offensive? In this way it is a matter for the referee 
to consider time and distance. It is not relevant if 
the player hit the  ball as hard as he/she could or 
used unusual techniques. 
Rule 9.2.2.1 
5.3.9 
In setting, what factors should the 1st
 
Referee look 
at if the player is using a technique that involves 
a long and protracted contact time (CATCH) with 
the hands?  
 
Click Here for Video 
 
Ruling 
The referee should consider how clean the  contact 
was. Were the hands  / fingers simultaneous in 
contacting the ball, and was the ball played  with 
one quick motion - i.e., not visibly resting in the 
player's hands - or was the player using a technique 
that involved a long and protracted contact time 
(CATCH) with the    hands? 
Rules 9.3.3, 9.3.4, Referee Guidelines and 
Instructions 
5.3.10 
If a player is playing the ball in a specific way - by 
utilizing a defensive technique on a hard driven ball, 
with open outstretched forearms and with fingers 
pointing downwards to the ground on both hands - 
and extends his/her hand contact with the ball 
momentarily (i.e. there is no REBOUND from the 
hands), should the 1st referee consider this as a 
“Catch”? 
Ruling 
Yes. With the possible exception of setting 
overhand with fingers, Volleyball hits involve a 
rebound from the contact point. The action 
described in the case will create a hit which is not a 
rebound, because this technique involves both 
wrists being invert ed (thus fingers pointing 
downwards to the ground, palms upwards and 
thumbs facing sideways – which the rules 
specifically regard as illegal) the referee should 
consider this as a CATCH. 
Rules 9.2.2.1, 9.3.3 
5.3.11 
During a joust, can the ball’s direction change while 
Ruling 
Yes, it is legal within a joust (extended ball contact) 

 
 18 
both players are in contact with the ball? for the ball’s direction to change  due to the forces 
applied by the opponents’ hands. Play continues 
afterwards.                                                         
Rule 9.1.2.3 
5.3.12 
Is it allowed to play a ball as a hard driven ball ( i.e., 
by momentary extended contact with hands) if the 
ball is coming from the opponent’s block? 
Ruling 
Yes. This is legal if satisfying the requirements of  a 
hard driven ball defence. The ball rebounding or 
being deflected off the block is considered like an 
attack hit and in this case the ball contact with the 
hands may be slightly extended.  
                                            Rule 9.2.2.1 
 
BALL AT THE NET 
 
5.4.1 
If the service takes the ball “over” the antenna, on  
the side of the 2nd  Referee, should he/she whistle 
this ball? 
Ruling 
This is a situation where the 2nd Referee must blow 
his / her whistle, as play cannot legally continue (the 
ball must pass completely between the antennae 
after a serve) and it lies within the jurisdiction of the 
2nd Referee because it happens on his/ her side of 
the court, signaling OUT.   
Active and competent line judges play an important 
role in such plays, giving a “wave and point” signal. 
Rules 10.1.1.2, 23.3.2.4 
5.4.2 
When the ball was completely above the court of 
team A, it was attacked by the team A player. 
Simultaneous with this, the opponent blocker also 
contacted the ball. Is this a blocking fault? 
Click Here for Video 1   
Click Here for Video 2   
Click Here for Video 3   
Click Here for Video 4   
 Click Here for Video 5 
Ruling 
This is not a fault of either player. It would be a fault 
if the blocker had contacted the ball first, however. 
It is important to appreciate that this ruling only 
applies to attack-block simultaneous actions. 
Had the team A player been setting the ball, on the 
other hand, because the ball was completely in the 
space of team A, the blocker would have been at 
fault for “reaching beyond the net” to intercept an 
internal pass. 
Rule 14.3   
 
PLAYER AT THE NET 
 
5.5.1 
If the attacking player lands, hits an opponent in his 
own playing court and space, causing the opponent 
to contact the lower part of the net, should the 2nd 
Referee whistle for interference? 
Ruling 
This is clearly interference, so the attacking player 
should be whistled. The signal is simply to indicate 
the offending player. 
Rules 11.2.1, 11.3.1, 11.4.2, 11.4.3, Referee 
Guidelines and Instructions 
5.5.2 
If a player after a spectacular diving action is lying 
Ruling 
Yes, even though no contact has occurred. It is a 

 
 19 
in the opponent’s court, and the blocker on that 
side stops because jumping will bring him into the 
path of the player lying on the sand, should this be  
called interference? 
fault if the player, through contact or the threat 
of contact, prevents a player from making a play on 
the ball, when they in the referee’s judgment would 
have been able to play this subsequent shot. The 
blocking player has been prevented by the 
opponent player’s position from playing the ball 
Rules 11.2.1, 11.4.2, 11.4.3, Referee Guidelines  
and Instructions 
5.5.3 
If a player, after attacking a ball, comes underneath 
the net and slightly touches the blocker, is this  
considered as interference? 
Click Here for Video 
Ruling 
This depends only on whether the blocker was in  a 
position that his ability to play the next ball was 
reduced. 
Rules 11.1.2, 11.2.1, 11.4.2, Referee Guidelines  
and Instructions  
5.5.4  
If a ball is passed by player A outside the antenna 
on the side of the 2nd Referee and his/her 
teammate, coming under the net to try to retrieve 
the ball, is deliberately obstructed by the player on 
the opponent side, should the 2nd Referee whistle 
this action as interference? 
 
   Click Here for Video 
Ruling 
Yes. This is a form of interference even if a physical 
contact has not occurred. It is illegal for a player, 
to substantially alter his/ her position in order to  
prevent the opponents from making a legitimate 
play on the ball. 
The other way around, despite at Beach Volleyball a 
player being allowed to run through the opponent's 
court to retrieve balls at the opponent's free zone 
regardless his/her full awareness on how the ball 
travelled the crossing space, that player, in the case 
the ball travelled inside the crossing space will be 
accountable for possible interference with the 
opponents’ ability to play the ball , i.e.: the case 
where the opponent player would be inhibited from 
even making a decision whether or not to play the 
ball...so preventing proper decision making. 
This might be a valid basis for calling it interference. 
Rules 10.1.2, 10.1.2.1, 11.4.3, Referee Guidelines  
and Instructions 
5.5.5 
After a block, the blocker (Team B)  falls on the 
sand, partially on the opponent side (Team A). The 
ball, hitting the net a n d  e n t e r i n g  t h e  s p a c e  
o f  T e a m  A after the block, falls on the blocker, 
still lying on the side of the opponent. The attacking 
team had no chance of playing this ball. Is this called 
interference? 
Ruling 
Interference would only occur if the blocking player 
lying in the ground would hinder an  opponent’s 
legitimate attempt to play the ball. As this was not  
the case here, the referee should treat this ball 
as if it had landed on the ground, with the blocking 
team consequently and correctly winning the rally. 
Rules 11.2.1, 11.4.3 
5.5.6 
When a ball was played between the antennae  
going to  the opponent’s (Team B’s)  fre e  zo n e  
and a player, trying to go to this ball to play it, 
was obstructed by the opponent, should the 1st  
Referee see this as interference? 
Ruling 
No, the overriding consideration must be that the 
team (Team A) directing the ball towards the 
opponent’s side does not have a legal play on the 
ball because the ball passed completely between 
the antennae and so only the Team B players may 

 
 20 
play the ball. Should the Team A player actually 
contact the ball in this case, the 1st Referee must 
immediately whistle a fault.  
Rules 10.1.1, 13.1.2 
5.5.7 
In a match one player close to the 1st  Referee 
crossed under the net to the opponent’s court 
whilst trying to recover a ball that had passed the 
vertical plane of the net through the crossing space. 
The opponent player whilst playing the ball in 
his/her defensive action was contacted by the 
player who came under the   net.  What should   the   
referee   do?   And what should he do if in a similar 
situation the ball was crossing the vertical plane of 
the net outside the crossing space? 
Ruling 
In this scenario there was always interference 
involved – by the player who was crossing  
underneath the net, if the ball was going through 
the crossing space. 
If the ball crossed outside the  crossing space, then 
the defensive player had no right to play the ball 
and should be called for interference. 
 
 
Rule 11.4.3 
5.5.8 
When a player is moving his/her hand(s) close to  
the net on their side deliberately altering the 
rebound of the ball, is this permitted? 
 
 
Click Here for Video 
 
Ruling 
No. This is a fault and is a form of interference. It is 
penalized as a net touch, as the player is 
considered to have touched the net, not the net 
touching the player. The referee must clearly see 
that the player has deliberately altered his/her 
position in order to initiate this contact through the 
net, creating an advantage.                                                          
Rule 11.4.3 
5.5.9 
The ball hits the top of the net, causing the net 
to touch the blocking player. The 2nd Referee blows 
the fault of the blocking player. After that the ball 
goes out on the side of the attacking player. The 1st 
Referee   is in doubt about the decision of the 2nd 
Referee and calls a replay. 
Can a captain ask for a Protest? 
Ruling 
After receiving the explanation, a captain can  
always ask the 1st Referee for a Protest. 
However, it is the 1 s tReferee who must determine 
whether the protest is legitimate by considering the 
criteria under which a protest can be lodged 
before initiating the Protest Protocol. 
Rules concerned: 
Rule 11.3.3 
When the ball is driven into the net, causing it  to 
touch an opponent, no fault is committed. 
Rule 8.2  
The ball is out of play at the moment of the  fault 
which is whistled by one of the referees; in  the 
absence of a fault, at the moment of the whistle. 
If the captain does not agree with the decision of  
the 1st Referee of not giving way to the protest, or 
the outcome of the protest at Level 1, and wants to 
lodge a protest at Level 2, he must then follow 
the relevant procedures. 
Rules 8.2, 12.3.3 
 

 
 21 
5.5.10 
A ball was blocked straight down. Before the ball 
landed on the opponent’s court, the ball  touched 
the leg of the middle blocker, who was already 
standing on the sand without the intention of 
kicking the ball. If there was no leg hit, the ball 
would have landed clearly on th e sand on team B’s 
side. 
Can the middle blocker’s leg touch be considered as 
an interference to the opponent’s play? 
Ruling 
No. 
Because the middle blocker’s leg  touch was 
unintentional and he already stood on the sand, he 
made no mistake. 
However, if the contact was well above the sand, 
and there was an opponent player with a potential 
play on the ball, then this is interference. 
 
Rule 11.2.1 
5.5.11 
After a dig by team A the ball went high around the 
antenna and it was supposed to land close to the 
sideline. It was difficult to determine if the path was 
within the crossing space or over the antenna. A 
player from team A was running under the net to 
replay the ball. Meanwhile a player from team B 
was also read y to play close to the sideline. 
However, the 2 players almost collided with each 
other, the player of team B played the ball 
successfully and the rally continued. How should it 
be determined if a fault has been committed and in 
this case which player was at fault? 
 
 
Click Here for Video 
 
Ruling 
The crucial point is the trajectory of the ball. 
If the ball clearly passed the net plane within the 
antennae, i.e., through the crossing space, team A 
had no right to play it back . It means the running 
player of team A interfered with the opponent’s 
play and made a fault regardless, if the opponent 
successfully hit the ball. 
If the ball clearly passed the net plane over or 
outside the antennae, i.e., partly or totally outside 
of the crossing space, team A had the right to play it 
back. In this case the team B’s player interfered with 
the opponent’s play and made a fault regardless of 
whether the opponent successfully hit the ball. 
If the ball’s trajectory was in doubt, and neither 
referees, nor line judges could determine this, both 
players may legally think, that their action to try to 
play the ball is legal.  It is impossible to determine 
the faulty player. In such a situation it is worth not 
stopping the rally. 
Rules 10.1, 11.2, 11.4.2 
 
SERVICE 
 
5.6.1 
Is it allowed for a player to be ready for service, 
standing outside the extension of the side lines? 
Ruling 
Yes. A player can be authorized to serve even 
though he/ she is outside the extension of the 
sidelines. The criteria the 1st Referee should apply 
before authorization for serve should be if: 
1) all other players and officials are ready. 
2) the serving player is in possession of the ball.  
3) the player to serve is correct according to the 
service order. 
                                                                      Rule 12.3 
5.6.2 
At the start of the 2nd set the wrong team is  
executing the service. And after the rally, the 2nd  
Ruling 
The set should be restarted. 
If a wrong player serves and the rally is completed 

 
 22 
Referee and  the scorer, as well as both teams  
acknowledge that indeed the wrong team took the 
service, what should the 1st  Referee do in such a  
case? 
a team can only maintain any points gained if the 
correct team was serving (not as in this case  the 
incorrect team). 
Rule 12.1.1 
5.6.3 
What should the 1st  Referee do if, after the  server 
tosses the ball in the air, it slightly contacts  the 
overhead boom camera? 
Ruling 
The referee should call a replay and  re-authorize 
service. There has been external interference to the 
service. 
The server could be requested to move  his/her 
position slightly to solve the problem or to wait for  
a short time for the camera to move. 
Rules 12.3, 17.2 
5.6.4 
When a player is serving with one foot close to the  
end line, and pushes some sand causing the line to  
move, is the 1st Referee entitled to call a foot fault? 
 
 
Click Here for Video 
 
Ruling 
This situation can easily lead to a 1st Referee error. 
The 1st Referee is at a higher position (being on the 
referee’s stand) and a long distance from the 
potential fault. The line may move due to  sand 
pushing the line. Although no fault has  been 
committed, this may look like a fault. 
Rule 12.4.3 
5.6.5 
Is dropping a ball , immediately after the  
authorization of the service, considered as a service 
fault? 
 
Click Here for Video 
 
Ruling 
No. If a player has not released the ball (tossed),  
with the intention of initiating a service, he/she 
should be authorized to initiate the serving routine 
again.  
A referee must understand that players have many 
unique serving action techniques that may involve  
the ball actually leaving the players hands ( e.g., 
from one hand to another, spinning, etc .) before 
the final toss for initiating service. 
Rules 12.4.1, 12.4.2 
5.6.6  
When a player hesitates in executing the  service, 
should the 1st Referee whistle after 5 seconds and  
give the ball to the opponents? 
Ruling 
The referee must consider the player’s normal  
service routine. Has the player clearly seen the  
service authorization (or heard the whistle) or is 
the player clearly intending to delay the service. 
Rule 12.4.4 
5.6.7 
After having been authorized to serve, th e player  
drops the ball during the action of preparing to toss 
the ball for service. The 1st R eferee observed that 
the ball  was partly wet due to contact with the 
player’s wet top.  In this case, is the 1st Referee 
allowed to replace the ball? 
Ruling 
Yes. The 1st Referee has clearly considered  the 
following in making this decision: 
That there was no deliberate attempt to delay  the 
game. 
1) that the action of dropping the ball was  
accidental and was not an intentional tactic to  
delay.  

 
 23 
2) the spirit of the rules of the game. 
3) to ensure that normal playing conditions  are 
maintained a new ball should be utilised. This  may 
involve the wet ball being replaced. 
Rule 3.1 
5.6.8 
If a player serves from a position outside  the 
extensions of the side -lines, what is the official  
signal for this fault? 
Ruling 
The correct signal would be signal 22, indicating that 
the server touched the ground outside the  service 
zone. This is done by pointing to the ground in  the 
extension of the line that the player has  served 
outside.                                            
Rule 12.4.3, Signal 12 
5.6.9 
Serving the ball from the hand, could seem like the 
ball was not released at the moment of the 
execution of the serve. Should the referee call this 
ball? 
Ruling 
Not necessarily, because players often release the 
ball fractionally before contact by the other hand. 
 
Rule 12.4.1 
5.6.10 
Can the 1st  Referee, before the start of the next  
rally, reconsider his/her previous decision; for 
example, if a line judge signaled a foot fault of the 
server and the 1st referee at the appropriate time 
didn’t see the signaling of this Line Judge? 
Ruling 
Yes. He/she must follow a correct sequence of  
events to make a final decision by clarifying with the 
line judge the nature of their signal. 
However, at the time immediately after the service 
it good technique for the 1st Referee to check 
momentarily for any possible signal from  the 
respective line judges. 
Rule 12.6.1.2, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
5.6.11 
After the whistle for service, the captain of team  A 
requests a TO from the 2nd  Referee and starts  
walking to the chairs. The 2nd  Referee does not 
blow the whistle and tries to get the team back into 
the playing court. The 1st Referee, seeing this, calls 
a replay, and grants team A their request for TO. 
Is this the proper procedure? 
Ruling 
No - after the referee has whistled for service,  the 
captain of team A had no right to ask for the TO, and 
certainly was not granted permission to leave  the 
court. 
After the whistle for service by the 1st  Referee, the 
service should be executed. 
Rules 12.3, 15.5.4, 16.1, 16.2.1, 16.2.2, 16.2.3 
 
ATTACK HIT 
 
5.7.1 
If an attacking player, pushes the ball with open  
hand into the block, is this always consider as a  
fault? 
Ruling 
The referee should call an attack hit fault if  the 
attacking action was prior to the block  action. 
However, if the actions were simultaneous,  there 
would be no fault and play should continue, as long 
as part of the ball was on each team’s side (i.e.,  
making each team’s play legal). 
Rule 13.2.3 

 
 24 
5.7.2 
When the ball is close to the net, but the  blocking 
action resembles more a set than a block,  what 
should be the reaction of the 1st Referee? 
Ruling 
If the player’s action is not regarded as being a block 
then the referee may need to look at how clean 
was the contact (catch or double contact) and  the 
trajectory of the ball after the contact. 
Rules 9.3.3, 9.3.4, 13.2.5 
5.7.3 
Is a player allowed to play the ball at the last 
minute intentionally in a reverse direction over  
his/her shoulders into the opponent’s court? 
Ruling 
Yes, provided that the ball travels in a trajectory 
perpendicular to the line of the player’s  shoulders, 
and that the player has established his/her shoulder 
position before the initial contact is made (either in 
a forward or backward direction). 
Rule 13.2.5, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
5.7.4 
If the ball is set cleanly, and the wind catches the  
ball and places the ball at the opponent side of 
the net, should the 1st Referee penalize the team 
for an attack hit fault? 
Ruling 
No. This is a common misinterpretation of the 
rules and is not a fault. If the intention of the team  
“A” player is to set the ball to their partner, no fault 
exists. The wind causing the ball to cross over the  
net or the trajectory of the ball not being in line with 
the player’s shoulders is irrelevant in deciding on 
this fault. 
Rule 13.2.5, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
 
BLOCK 
 
5.8.1 
Is it legal to block a sky service ball into the net and 
then play it the second time to your partner? 
Ruling 
No. This is a fault. It is not legal to block a service.  
The first contact is not legal so the 1st referee 
should have whistled a fault as soon as the player 
blocked the ball. 
Rules 14.1.1, 14.1.3, 14.5, 14.6.3 
5.8.2 
If a player is late in blocking and in doing so  is 
approximately 1 meter from the net, can he/she, 
if the ball touches his/her hands, play the ball for  a 
second consecutive time  
 
Click Here for Video 
 
Ruling 
There is no definition of “close to the net”. 
The referee must penalize it as a double contact 
fault if he/she believes the first contact of this 
player did not satisfy the requirements of a block. 
The distance from the net is important, as a block 
must be completed “close to the  net”. However, a 
taller player’s body may be further from the net 
than a smaller one, yet the hands can be over the 
net – so “close to the net” can be relative, and 
depend on a variety of factors. 
Rules 9.3.4, 14.1.1 
5.8.3 
If the ball is coming to the net, is the blocking player 
allowed to redirect the ball in any position? 
Ruling 
While the block is a defensive action it does not 
follow the same criteria as a hard driven ball 

 
 25 
defence. The referee should not allow prolonged 
contact ( i.e., catch) of the block. The ball can be 
redirected by a block provided that it satisfies the 
definition of a block and the contact time is not 
prolonged. 
Rule 14.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 26 
 
 
TIME OUTS 
 
6.1.1  
Is it allowed for a team, after asking for the TO,  to 
stay on the playing court? 
Ruling 
No, this is not allowed. During all regular  
interruptions and set intervals (including Technical 
Time outs) , players must go to their designated 
players’ area. 
Rule 15.4.4, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
6.1.2  
After the 2nd Referee whistles for the end of the 
TO, the players aren’t moving to the court, is it 
correct for the 1st Referee to issue a delay sanction? 
Ruling 
If after 15 seconds the players have not returned 
to the court then the delay is significant. It is  very 
important that the 2nd Referee be very active at 
the end of the timeout encouraging both teams to  
return to the playing  court. Hence, the 1 st referee 
should issue a delay sanction. 
Rules 15.4.1, 16.1.1, Ref Guidelines & Instructions 
6.1.3  
Is it allowed for one team to request a TO at the 
end of the TO of the opponents? 
 
 
Reference: Case 10.7 
Ruling 
The referees should accept this request for a time 
out, blowing the whistle and repeating the  official 
hand signals. The timing of the 30 seconds  should 
commence when both teams are back at  their 
designated chairs (or as appropriate). At  the 
completion of the 30 seconds the referees  should 
whistle, signal and verbally request the teams  to 
return to the playing court. The 2nd Referee should 
at this time indicate to both teams that they have  
used their allowed Time-outs 
Rule 15.2.1, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
6.1.4 
During a match, the captain of team A requested 
a second TO in the set. The 2nd Referee accepted it, 
while stating to the scorer that the first TO was  to 
team B. After correction of the score sheet by  the 
scorer, later in the set, team B requested (their first) 
TO. After rejection by the 2nd Referee , and the  
protest of team B, the 2nd Referee realized that 
team A had been granted two TO’s in the set. 
What would be the solution at the time of the  
match? 
Ruling   
Although the right moment of the second request 
of the captain of team A could be tracked, after  
playing the next rally, this can only be considered as 
a fault of the referee concerned. 
Team B has no right to go back in time and replay  
the match from the point that team A received their 
second TO. (At the time this should have been 
recorded as  an improper request or as a delay  
sanction.) 
Rules 15.5.3, 15.5.4, 16.1, 16.2.1, 16.2.2, 16.2.3 
6.1.5 
Is it allowed to give an improper request after a 
previously given delay warning or penalty in the 
same match? 
 
 
 Ruling 
The first improper request by a team in the match 
that does not affect or delay the game shall be 
rejected without any other consequences. 
There is nothing in the rule statement about the 
previous events before the improper request. If a 
                CHAPTER 6 – TIME OUTS AND DELAYS 

 
 27 
request is improper for the first time by a team, it 
should be considered as an “improper request”; it 
doesn’t matter, if previously the team received a 
delay sanction. 
So, after a DW or DP, an “improper request” may 
still be committed – and recorded on the score 
sheet. 
        Rule 15.11.2 
6.1.6  
During a match, while directly walking into his 
team’s area, the team A player who was not the 
captain requested a TO. The 2nd R eferee did not 
accept the request and an “improper request” was 
issued to team A. In the meantime, the team A 
captain requested a TO at the same interruption, 
which was also not accepted by the 2nd Referee.  
Was the 2nd Referee correct?  
Ruling 
The referee is correct in issuing an “improper 
request”. This is to be rejected without sanction 
unless repeated, or it affects or delays the game. 
However, depending on the circumstances, the 
described scenario could lead to one of the two 
following consequences:  
1) In case no delay sanction applies, there is no rule 
that says there cannot be a legitimate request from 
the captain during the same interruption. So, in 
such circumstance the 2nd Referee  should have 
accepted the TO request from the captain. 
2) If there was a delay sanction applied, then the 
captain’s TO request would not be permitted in the 
same interruption.  
                                           Rules 15.3, 15.5.2, 15.5.4     
6.1.7  
Time out duration is set at 30 seconds. Can this be 
adjusted? 
  
 
Ruling 
Yes. The duration of time outs can be adjusted 
according to the needs of the competition.  
This is a separate issue from allowing players to re -
enter the court before the whistle which ends the 
time out (which depending the circumstances may 
be also permitted). 
                                       Rule 15.4.1   
 
DELAYS TO THE GAME 
 
6.2.1 
Is it allowed to give 2 delay warnings to the  same 
team in one set? 
 
Reference: Case 10.8 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee should not give 2 delay warnings 
to one team in the same set or the same match. 
Delay warnings are recorded on the score sheet  so 
the scorer should immediately notify the 1st 
Referee (via the 2nd Referee) of this error. 
Rules 16.2.1, 16.2.1.1, 16.2.1.2, 16.2.2, 16.2.3 
6.2.2  
Is it allowed for players to frequently go slowly 
into position, wiping their glasses and cleaning sand 
from their body, as a result extending the time 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee should maintain control of the 
pace of the match, not being controlled by the 
players. By extending the time between rallies 

 
 28 
between rallies beyond 12 seconds? beyond 12 seconds there has been a delay. 
The referee must control the time between rallies, 
verbally warning where appropriate. Then when a 
player deliberately or repeatedly delays the  
match, issue a formal delay warning to the team. 
Rule 16.1.3 
6.2.3  
When the players are in position to receive the next 
serve, one of them asks permission of the 1st 
Referee to wipe her face. Should the 1st referee 
authorize this request? 
Ruling 
In this case, the referee should decline this request 
as the player is prolonging the time between rallies 
beyond 12 seconds. At the completion of the rally 
the player should have left the court quickly to wipe 
her face.  
The referee should only authorize this request if:  
1) a substantial danger exists to the player, and 
2) the player did not intentionally create this delay. 
Rule 16.1.3, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
6.2.4  
Is it allowed for a player to wipe his/her head 
and arms with the small towel hanging at the net 
pole, which  is foreseen as a towel to clean the 
glasses from the players? 
Reference: Case 10.9 
Ruling 
No, this is not allowed. The 1st Referee should 
consider this as intentional delay of the game  and 
should issue a delay sanction. 
 
Rule 16.1.3, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
6.2.5  
If a team is delaying the start of the match by 
not coming into the court after this is requested 
by the referees, what would be the correct 
procedure by the 1st Referee? 
Reference: Case 10.12 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee should apply a delay sanction prior  
to the start of the game. 
 
 
Rule 16.2.2 
6.2.6  
During a match, the captain of team A requests  a 
second TO in the set. The 2nd Referee authorises it. 
As the players walk to their chairs,  the scorer 
informs the 2nd  Referee that team A already had  
one TO in that set. The 2nd Referee calls both 
teams back to their playing positions, and the  1st 
Referee gives a delay sanction to team A. 
Was this the right procedure? 
Ruling 
This is, considering the elapsed time, the  right 
solution. 
The 2nd  Referee must always be aware of the  
number of TOs used, and he should have rejected 
the request and instructed the scorer to register an 
improper request on the score sheet. 
 
Rules 15.5.3, 15.5.4, 16.1, 16.2.1, 16.2.2, 16.2.3 
 
EXCEPTIONAL GAME INTERRUPTIONS 
 
6.3.1  
What should a referee do if a player, after  being 
injured, leaves the court and doesn’t return after 
5 minutes? 
 
Ruling 
As soon as the 1st Referee (within the limits of the 
current regulations) establishes that medical 
assistance is required, he/she must ensure: 
1) that the accredited medical staff and Delegate(s) 

 
 29 
Reference: Case 10.10 are requested to come to the court immediately.  
Note that as a precaution the accredited  medical 
staff must be requested to come to the court in  all 
cases of injury whether requested by the player  or 
not. 
2) that the player(s) remain within the playing area 
or the respective team’s area. 
3) that if a referee allows an injured player to leave 
the playing area or the respective team’s area, a 
referee should initially accompany this player. 
4) t hat the scorer has correctly recorded all 
important information. 
5) that the other players are informed of all relevant 
information. 
In this case the player’s team should been declared 
incomplete and the match finished. 
Rule 17.1.2 
6.3.2  
If there is a small blood injury, is the player allowed 
to quickly clean and bandage the cut? 
 
 
Reference: Case 10.11 
Ruling 
Yes. The referees must be very careful in  their 
enforcement of regulations related to blood for the 
safety of all match participants. 
If the injury is small, the referees can allow 
(without assigning a MTO  to the team ), sufficient 
time to fix the injury. 
 
Rule 17.1.2, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
6.3.3  
Under severe weather conditions, a player is unable 
to keep playing as she is having trouble breathing 
due to asthma.  
How should the referees proceed?  
 
Ruling 
The team is first entitled to a timeout if available,  
and if necessary, a Medical Assistance interruption 
for that given player. So, the 2nd Referee, should: 
1)  first authorize a team TO,  
2)  then establish if the player wishes to be treated 
by the official medical personnel or the team’s 
accredited medical personnel,  
3) followed by  immediately call ing the relevant 
medical assistance to the court, 
4) then, only in case the issue is not resolved, the 
2nd referee must signal to the 1st referee to come 
down the stand and inform the player that a 
“recovery interruption” will be authorized and 
initiated by the 1st referee. 
The 1st referee after coming down the stand and 
while close to the scorer’s table: 
1) ensures that all relevant aspects are meet, i.e.: 
arrival of the official medical personnel (in case this 
has been the choice of the injured player), or if no 

 
 30 
official medical personnel available, or if the player 
asked for their own accredited medical personnel, 
2) followed by immediately initiating the “Recovery 
Interruption” protocol (RIT).  
3) this is done by whistling and showing the number 
5 with the fingers raised and asking the scorer to 
start the timing.  
Similar process to be implemented in case a player 
presents the same symptoms before the start of the 
match, or the set, as a team is legally entitled to a 
timeout and if necessary, a Medical Assistance 
interruption for a given player although the teams 
have not commenced playing (first serve).  
Rule 17.1.2, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
6.3.4  
When a player at a “ Recovery Interruption” (RIT) 
requests the accredited medical staff, is he /she 
allowed to decline treatment by a first aid attendant 
coming quickly to the court? 
Ruling 
Yes, if the player asks for the accredited medical  
staff, a first aid attendant will not be considered as 
such. 
It is up to the Delegate (s) to determine the 
suitability of the accredited medical staff  in 
performing their function. 
Rule 17.1.2, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
6.3.5  
Is it allowed for a player not to request  medical 
assistance after a small injury, stating that all will 
be alright in a short time? 
Ruling 
Yes, if the time the player needs is a short one 
the referees should allow this. 
The 2nd Referee must strictly supervise the  player 
during this time. 
Referees should note that unless in extreme  cases 
where the official medical personnel can oppose it, 
it is always the player’s final decision whether he/ 
she is fit to resume the match. 
The referees should, in all cases of injury, call  the 
authorized medical personnel to the court  
regardless of whether a “Medical Assistance” 
protocol is enacted or not. 
Rule 17.1.2, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
6.3.6  
A team asks for the Technical Delegate to check 
the lack of light. The Delegate stops the game and 
the match will start again the next morning with the 
score 0-0. What are the criteria for a Technical 
Delegate to decide if the match is to continue? 
 
 
 
Reference: Case 10.13 
Ruling 
The Delegate should consider the following: 
1) t here is no stipulated maximum or minimum 
natural lighting for daytime matches; however, 
1000 lux at 1 meter above the playing surface could 
be used as a reference.  
2) w hether normal playing conditions ar e possible 
for the players during the whole of the rest o f the 
match. 
3) w hether the captains wish to stop the  match. 

 
 31 
Both teams can agree to continue the match. 
4) t he availability of artificial lights to  possibly 
continue the match. 
5) the next day’s playing schedule. 
Rule 1.6 
6.3.7  
If during play a player is faking an injury, and in  
doing so lets the 1st Referee stop the play 
immediately, and after that the player states that 
nothing is  preventing him  for playing, has the 
referee any means to stop this non-fair play issue? 
Ruling 
No. After whistling for the alleged injury, the  1st 
Referee has no means to recall his/her decision and 
must let the rally be replayed. 
Under the rules of the game a referee must whistle 
when he/she believes that a serious injury  has 
occurred and / or if a player may be further injured  
if play continues. 
This whistle (if it occurs during a rally) results in  a 
replay. If the whistle occurs after the rally has been 
completed, the result of the rally as  completed 
stands. 
The referee should not enter into  a debate about 
the validity of the injury with any of the players. 
Rule 17.1.1, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
6.3.8  
Is it allowed for a player to ask any direct 
assistance from the referees to minimize pain at an 
injury? 
Ruling 
While it is the responsibility of officials to ensure  
safe conditions for the players, this does not include 
providing personal medical assistance. 
The referee’s prime responsibility in situations such 
as this is to ensure access to medical staff is as 
quick as possible (by following the Medical 
Assistance Protocol). 
Rules 17.1.2, 23.2.7 
6.3.9 
Is it allowed for a team to request medical  
assistance for the duration of the time between 
sets or during TO and TTO? 
Ruling 
Yes. This request is legal and should be initiated 
as soon as possible by both officials. A player has  
the right to request and then utilise medical 
assistance in their designated seats for the whole 
duration of the time between sets (also during 
Technical Timeouts and Timeouts). 
Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
 
6.3.10  
If a tree branch is hanging over the service zone,  
and this was previously approved and officially 
communicated by the Technical Delegate , is the 
player making a fault  when by throwing the ball 
into the air for the service, the ball hits the branch? 
Ruling 
The player is not committing any fault. If  the 
Technical Delegate  approved and officially 
communicated these special circumstances, the 1st 
Referee should call a replay of the service. 
Rules 1.1, 8.4.2, 17.2 
 

 
 32 
6.3.11  
At 22:22 in the 1 st set and following an attack by 
Team B, Team A’s defending player miss-directs the 
ball towards the back of his own court (close to the 
end line). Team A’s partner starts chasing the ball 
but before reaching it, a stray ball enters the free 
zone between the panels and the same end line, in 
sight of all players and referees. 
Both Team B players react verbally and wave their 
arms towards the referees re: the external ball 
entering the playing area, and consequently 
hesitate to continue the rally, delaying their 
movements, and losing focus, which allowed Team 
A to easily ground the ball on Team B’s court and 
win the rally. Conversely, the Team A players 
throughout did not question the position of the 
stray ball, maintained focus, and did not stop 
playing. 
Although both referees saw the external ball 
entering the playing area during the rally, and the 
gestures and hesitation by Team B players, the 1 st 
referee awarded the point to Team A, advancing the 
score to 23:22. (Unfortunately the score was not 
advanced by the scorer and remained at 22:22 on 
the e-Scoresheet). 
The ensuing actions resulted in a 14-minute delay to 
the match before play resumed. 
Should the referees have stopped the rally and 
replayed, and does either team have a case for 
protest? 
Ruling 
Rule 17.2 states that “ If there is any external 
interference during the game, the play has to be 
stopped and the rally is replayed.” In this case both 
referees saw the external ball invading the playing 
area, and should have been able  to recognise the 
claim by Team B players and their hesitation, yet 
both referees considered that the action did not 
interfere with play. 
The incident described suggests external 
interference, so a straightforward application of the 
rule would have been: interrupt play and replay the 
rally. 
This would have entitled Team B to a legitimate 
request for a protest protocol due to suspected 
misinterpretation of the rule.   
If the protest is based on this as a judgment call  
rather than a misinterpretation/misapplication of 
the rule, the TD under the advice of the R C could 
not uphold  the protest protocol. This would have 
serious financial consequences for Team B ($500). 
“Clever refereeing” implies common sense. If there 
is no reaction including when players do not care 
about it and want to keep playing, then "clever 
refereeing" should prevail. 
Finally, a 14-minute delay related to a dispute of a 
refereeing decision is totally unacceptable in our 
sport. 
 
Rules 16, 17, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
6.3.12 
During a main draw Women’s match, the organising 
committee decided to stop all matches due to a 
thunderstorm. The interruption lasted for 
approximately 1 hour.  
The score recorded on the e-Score sheet at the time 
of the interruption in the 2nd set was 8-6 in favour of 
Team A, with Team A serving. 
At the end of the warm up to resume the match, 
with the 1 st referee on the stand, Team B insisted 
first with the 2nd referee and the scorer that the 
score was incorrect and then from the court they 
addressed the TD/RC in the spectator’s area, saying 
that they were leading 8 -6, and not Team A. The 
complaint was not an official protest. 
The R C decided to go and ask the 2nd referee to 
check the scoresheet and after a few seconds, the 
2nd referee advised that the score was correct (8 -6 
Ruling 
The scorer clearly made an error at the e -scoring 
when Team B won the rally and the service, after a 
missed serve by Team A at 7 -6, with the teams 
switching courts as required ( the court switch 
should have been recorded at 7-7). 
A number of  other procedural errors occurred, 
which would have prevented the embarrassing 
situation with an incorrect score and incorrect team 
to serve when play resumed. This included: 
1) immediately following the court switch, the 2nd 
and the 1st referee, before/or eventually after they 
left the court, did not properly check (as required) 
that all was correctly registered at the e-scoresheet 
(with the correct score, the correct server, etc.) 
2) when Team B questioned the score, after already 
such a long stop due to weather conditions, the R C 
should have taken the opportunity for only an extra 

 
 33 
to Team A), and that he was sure of it. The R C then 
told Team B that they had to resume play, which is 
what they did. 
Later the RC decided to download the video footage 
of the match and the scoresheet. He realised that 
when the score was 7 -6 in favour of Team A, when 
Team A had actually served into the net. The score 
should have become 7 -7 at the time of the 
interruption with Team B serving.  
By checking the scoresheet, the R C found that the 
scorer had awarded a point to Team A by mistake 
(making it 8-6 for Team A). Nobody on the court at 
that moment had realised the mistake, and 
everybody left due to the thunderstorm 
interruption. 
couple of minutes to go and look at the official video 
footage for the correct score and server. 
Rules 17.3.1, 23.2.3 
 
COURT SWITCHES AND INTERVALS 
 
6.4.1  
If in a set the court switch is remarked late by  
players, scorer and referee should the score be  
corrected? 
Ruling 
No, the score should not be corrected. Teams 
must change sides as soon as the error has been  
noticed. 
Rule 18.2.2 
6.4.2  
If during a match, due to the many TV requests 
for replays, the pace of the game is affected, what 
can a 1st Referee do? 
Ruling 
It is important that the 1st Referee at the  most 
convenient moment communicates this  
information to the Technical Delegate(s). 
While it is the responsibility of the match officials 
to work co-operatively with the TV coordinator and 
his/ her staff, they also represent the FIVB (player’s 
officials etc.,) and the spirit of the Official Rules. 
The Technical Delegate should be informed of  any 
circumstance when a referee considers that  the 
match conditions are being compromised. It is  also 
appropriate in this situation for the 1st Referee to 
talk to the players outlining the situation 
Rule 16.1.3, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 34 
 
 
MINOR MISCONDUCT   
 
7.1.1  
Does a referee by warning verbally and giving a  
yellow card to a player of a team in fact warn both  
players (the whole team)? 
 
 
Reference: Case 10.14 
Ruling 
Yes. A 1st Referee is correct in his action to verbally 
warn the players when they commit  minor 
misconduct. 
When issuing a formal warning through a yellow  
card, the referee is signaling to the team that it has  
reached the sanctioning level; however, this is 
shown to the relevant player. 
Rules 20.1, 20.2, Ref Guidelines and Instructions 
7.1.2  
How many warnings and penalties resulting  from 
minor misconduct can a team/player receive during 
a match? 
 
 
Reference: Case 10.15 
Ruling 
Only one misconduct formal warning through a 
yellow card can be issued to a given team during the 
whole match. 
Every additional action of minor misconduct by any 
player  in that team during the match will result in  
a misconduct penalty (with a maximum of 2 per set 
per player). 
However, a m isconduct penalt y originating in 
repeated minor misconduct , at the relevant 
FIVB/BPT competitions, will not be subject to 
money fee sanction.  
Rule 20.1, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
7.1.3  
At 20-20 1st set, after team A scoring the 21st point, 
one of the team B players complaints from the fact 
that the referee did not call what in his opinion was 
a bad setting action.  
Whilst team B had already received a misconduct 
formal warning (yellow card) in the course of that 
set, and the first referee considered the action of 
the team B player as a repetition of minor 
misconduct issuing team B player a misconduct 
penalty, this resulted in the score 22-20 for team A.   
Was the first referee, correct?  
Ruling 
Additional action of minor misconduct by any 
player  in a team previously sanctioned with a 
misconduct formal warning (yellow card) during the 
match will result in  a misconduct penalty , and so, 
depending on the seriousness of the minor 
misconduct, the referee has the authority to 
sanction the player with a misconduct penalty. 
However, the referee must carefully evaluate the 
level of seriousness of such minor misconduct, as to 
prevent deciding the set (or the game) with a 
penalty sanction. 
        Rule 20.1, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
 
MISCONDUCT LEADING TO SANCTIONS   
 
7.2.1  
Is it correct that a referee gives a red card when 
a player deliberately kicks the ball outside the  
court? 
Reference: Case 10.16 
Ruling 
The referee is correct in sanctioning the player for 
rude conduct, as the offence is deliberate , and 
substantial. 
Rules 20.2.1, 20.3.1 
                                                    CHAPTER 7 – MISCONDUCT 

 
 35 
7.2.2  
How many times can a player receive a red card  in 
one set? 
 
Reference: Case 10.17 
Ruling 
Two times. A third rude conduct by that same  
player in the same set would be sanctioned with  
expulsion. 
Rule 20.3.1 
7.2.3 
What happens if a player by pulling the net  breaks 
one of the posts holding it? 
 
Reference: Case 10.18 
Ruling 
The player should be sanctioned with a 
misconduct penalty. He/she will be fined after the 
match in accordance to the “Misconduct sanction 
fee scale”. 
The match can restart at another court with the  
same score;  however, due to the misconduct 
penalty, the opponent team will gain one point 
extra due to this misconduct penalty and the next  
serve. 
  Rules 20.2.1, 20.3.1, Ref Guidelines & Instructions 
7.2.4 
If in between sets, the 2nd Referee overhears a loud 
derogatory comment about the 1st  Referee, what 
should be his/her action? 
Ruling 
Initially the 2nd  Referee must report this action to  
the 1st Referee during the interval between sets. 
The 1st Referee should warn or sanction the player, 
as he/ she believes appropriate. The referee must  
closely look at the circumstances and the level of 
the offence and warn or sanction accordingly. 
Because the offence occurred between sets it must 
be applied at the start of the next set. 
This also applies to misconduct before the  match, 
which is applied before the first serve of the match. 
Rules 20.1, 20.2, 20.4 
7.2.5  
For issuing a misconduct penalty between two sets, 
what action should the 1st Referee apply? 
 
Reference: Case 10.19 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee must apply the sanction at the start 
of the next set. After showing the red card to  the 
relevant player, he/she must then show the  other 
team to serve. 
If the team who was sanctioned with the penalty  
was to serve, the opponents get the right to serve  
and must rotate one position. 
If the team who was sanctioned with the penalty  
was receiving, the opponents will receive 1 point  
and keep the service order. 
Rules 20.3.1, 20.4, Score sheet Instructions 
7.2.6  
If a player, disagreeing with the referee’s  decision, 
tears his/her uniform in anger, should the 1st 
Referee consider this as misconduct or as a delay to 
the game? 
 
Ruling 
The referee should consider this as a rude conduct. 
The action of the player ripping his/her playing 
top configures an equipment abuse scenario  o f  
“playing uniform abuse” which should be 
sanctioned with a red card. A player may receive a 

 
 36 
Reference: Case 10.20 maximum of two red cards in the same set. 
Rule 20.3.1 
7.2.7 
After the match has been completed by the  1st 
Referee, if a player  gets upset and removes the  
padding from the post and tears the court number  
off the referee’s stand, should this action, although 
it occurs after the completion of the  match, be 
recorded on the score sheet? 
Reference: Case 10.21 
Ruling 
Yes. The referee should record such actions in 
remarks section of the score sheet. 
 
 
 
Rule 20.4, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
7.2.8  
If a coach, standing outside the court during  the 
match, is constantly abusing the referees about 
their decisions by language and by  hand signals,  
what should the referees do? 
Ruling 
The referee cannot penalize the coach directly  for 
misconduct, as he/she is not a participant in  the 
match. 
If the coach is accredited, the referees can approach 
the Technical Delegate  about this issue, who  can 
decide whether or not the coach should lose his/her 
accreditation for the rest of the tournament. 
Rules 4.1.1, 4.1.4, Ref Guidelines and Instructions 
7.2.9  
After the decision of the 1st Referee regarding a 
ball mark protocol, one of the players got his 
camera and took a picture of the ball mark. After 
the match he looked for the RC trying to show the 
picture and claiming the 1st Referee took the wrong 
decision. What should the RC do? And what should 
the 1st Referee have done during the match? 
Ruling 
The player concerned should have been sanctioned 
for Rude Conduct by the 1st Referee in accordance  
with Rule 20.2.1. 
Any FIVB officials should refuse to consult any 
pictures of this type as they are not the  official 
footage and there is no proof that they relate to 
the specific incident during that match. 
Rules 19.1.2, 19.1.3, 20.2.1 
7.2.10 
If after a Technical Time Out, a red card (penalty) is 
issued to a player of the team ready to serve, 
because of misbehaviour during the allocation of 
the last point leading towards the TTO, should this  
team lose the right to serve at that moment? 
Ruling 
Yes, the 1st Referee should always, after issuing a  
red card to the player, give the right to serve to the 
opponent team and benefit the new serving team  
with a point. 
Rules 20.2.1, 20.3.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 37 
 
 
 
REFEREEING TEAM AND PROCEDURES 
8.1.1  
After the last call in the match, the captain of  the 
team that lost the match, asked the 1st  Referee to 
consult both Line Judges, who were signaling a  
touch of the block. The referee declined that, saying 
his decision was final. Can the captain protest on 
this point? 
Ruling 
A serious problem existed in the 1st  Referee’ 
officiating techniques, as collaboration is  very 
important in officiating. 
However, this protest will not be accepted, because 
this concerns a judgment call and the decision of 
the 1st Referee is final. 
Rule 21.2, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
8.1.2  
During a Quarter Final match on Centre Court, with 
the score at 1:0 to Team A in set 3, Team A won the 
next rally. The scorer added one point for Team A 
on the e-score tablet. However, due to the tablet’s 
slow response, it did not initially show the point for 
Team A and after a few seconds, the Scorer, 
believing that the point had not been added, hit the 
button again to add the point for Team A. After a 
few seconds the tablet no w displayed the score of 
3:0 to Team A. 
Despite advice from colleagues, the scorer insisted 
that 3:0 had to be the correct score. Team A finally 
won the third set 15:12. 
Sometime after the score sheet was signed, the 
error was confirmed.  
How should the scoring error have been prevented? 
What can now be done regarding the match result? 
 
Ruling 
Tight schedules in Beach events mean that it is vital 
that all scoring issues and protests are dealt with at 
the time. Since the score sheet was signed by both 
captains, without protest, ratifying the result, 
nothing can now be done regarding this mistake.  
There were a minimum of FIVE (5) officials who 
should have identified the scoring error, and who 
should have used their influence to correct it before 
the next rally commenced: 
1) t he Scorer should have been extra vigilant to 
know the score before advancing it ( i.e., 1:0), and 
what it should be after adding a point (in this case 
2:0). 
2) the Assistant Scorer (who was running a manual 
backup paper score sheet, who did advise on the 
correct score) should have been more insistent, and 
should have suggested calling over the 2nd Referee 
to discuss the problem before resuming the match.  
3) the Reserve Referee who was running the backup 
e-Score/Tablet, should have made the R C aware 
during the first set that there were problems with 
the technology and that they were unable to keep 
score securely during the match.  
4) both Referees should be checking the score after 
every rally, to ensure it advances only by one point 
each rally, and that the score is correct on the 
litescore display and large scoreboards. 
Greater teamwork, while respecting individual 
responsibilities, and unhesitatingly speaking up, 
would ensure this type of error would not happen. 
The Challenge Referee and the Official 
Timing/Scoreboard Operator who were part of this 
match, could also have played a role in addressing 
                                                      CHAPTER 8 – REFEREES 

 
 38 
the scoring error; however, the five officials listed 
above had the primary responsibility to ensure the 
score was correct before the start of the fourth rally.  
Even in a case where there are not as many officials 
assigned to a match ( i.e.: side court matches), the 
1st & 2nd Referee must be checking the score after 
every rally to minimise the chance of this kind of 
scoring error. 
               Rules 6.1.3, 21.1, 23.2.3, 26.2.2.1, 27.2.2.1, 
27.2.2.2, 27.2.2.4, 27.2.2.6, Referee Guidelines and 
Instruction (Sections 21-23 and 26-27 and “Protest 
Protocol”) 
 
FIRST REFEREE  
8.2.1  
If both players from a given team cross under the  
net to dispute one line judge’s call, should they 
both be issued with a red card? 
Ruling 
Yes! Any player who passes under the net or  its 
imaginary extension to review a ball mark  should 
receive a misconduct penalty from the referee. 
However, at the relevant FIVB/BPT competitions, 
this misconduct penalty is not subject to a money 
fee sanction.  
             Rules 22.3.1.1, 22.3.2.2, Referee Guidelines 
and Instructions 
8.2.2  
A match is stopped and delayed, because the  1st 
Referee broke his whistle and forgot a second  one. 
How should the referee have  prevented this 
problem? 
Ruling 
Referees should at all times carry with them a set 
of personal equipment including cards, a coin  and 
whistles. Referees cannot rely on equipment always 
being available or working every time. They  should 
prepare for this possibility. 
Rule 22.3, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
8.2.3  
If a ball retriever catches a ball in the field of play 
before the player is able to play it, should the  1st 
Referee call for a replay? 
 
Click Here for Video 
 
Ruling 
Yes, the referee is correct in replaying the point. It  
is considered in this case that the ball retriever has 
initiated the contact with the ball. 
The referees, TV staff and auxiliary officials within  
the free zone are considered as not causing external 
interference unless they initiate the contact (or  
threat of contact) with the player and/ or the ball. 
Officials contacting  the ball in their normal 
working position do not therefore constitute  
interference. 
Rule 17.2, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
8.2.4  
The start of the 2nd set is delayed for around 9 
minutes because after the 1st referee having issued 
a penalty sanction that ended the 1st set, one of the 
Ruling 
Unless for a valid formal protest about referees’ 
application or interpretation of the rules, where the 
RC or the TD (as applicable) would take over the 

 
 39 
losing players became verbally abusive as he walked 
over to his bench. As the player continued the 
verbal abuse the 1st referee asked the 2nd referee 
to call for the TD and/or RC for help. 
Was this a correct action by the 1st referee? 
responsibility of deciding the outcome of the 
protest, the 1st Referee directs the match from the 
start until the end. During the match his/her 
decisions are final. 
In this case, the 1st Referee did not assume his/ her 
responsibilities.  
Depending on the seriousness of the situation, the 
referee after dealing with it in due accordance to 
the official rules, which in fact was not done, could 
then have called the relevant FIVB Delegate close to 
the court, yet should never had come down the 
stand and interrupt the normal sequence of the 
match for discussing possible actions with the 
Referee Coach.  
Despite a Protest Protocol has not been initiated 
here, it must be clear that the 1st Referee is the 
responsible official for accepting such request by a 
given team, but only in the case it meets the criteria 
for a valid Protest. Only in that case, the concerned 
FIVB Delegate would follow up on such request.  
     Rule 22.2.1, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
8.2.5  
Given the verbal abuse by one of the players after 
the end of the match, the 1 st Referee was unsure 
what remarks needed to be included on the score 
sheet, so decided to leave it unsigned until the TD 
and RC met to discuss what would be recorded and 
they then wrote the comments and signed the score 
sheet on behalf of the referee.  
Was this correct? 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee is the ultimate responsible for 
completing and signing the scoresheet at the end of 
the match, including any possible reports on 
incidents occurred after the match. 
In this case, the 1st Referee did not assume his/ her 
duties and delegated responsibilities on the TD/RC.  
    Rule 22.3.3, Referee Guidelines and Instructions, 
Scoresheet Instructions 
 
SECOND REFEREE  
8.3.1  
If a ball touches the sand and the 1st Referee isn’t 
in the right position to call this ball, what should the 
2nd Referee do?   
    Click Here for Video 
 
Ruling 
This should have been immediately whistled by the  
2nd Referee at the time of the contact. 
 
Rule 23.3.2.5 
8.3.2  
A serve touches the net slightly at the side of the 
2nd Referee. Is he entitled to whistle for this? 
Ruling 
No. The ball touching the net after the service is not 
a fault. 
Rules 12.6.2.1, 23.3 
8.3.3  
At the time of the service by the opponents, the 
2nd Referee is  talking to the receiving team. The 
serving player  stops until the receiving team is 
clearly ready despite the 1st Referee having already 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee must not authorize service without 
ensuring that the receiving team is ready to receive 
service. 
The 2nd Referee must convey such important 
information to the 1st Referee, that he is not ready 

 
 40 
whistled and signaled for service. 
How could the 2nd Referee have prevented such a 
case? 
or that the receiving team is not ready – as it would 
influence the decision to whistle or not for service. 
In this way the 1st Referee can  make a final 
decision based on all available  information. This is 
an aspect of cooperation from the referees. 
Rules 12.3, 21.2 
8.3.4  
The serving player serves from outside the  
extension of the sideline and the 2nd Referee 
whistles and indicates a fault. Is this correct? 
Ruling 
No. The 2nd Referee has whistled outside his/  her 
jurisdiction.  
Rule 23.3, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
8.3.5  
A ball passes completely the vertical plane under  
the net. 
Who should call this ball? 
Ruling 
According to rule 23.3.2.6, this fault is now within  
the jurisdiction of the 2nd Referee. Accordingly, the 
1st Referee must wait for the 2nd Referee to 
indicate the nature of the fault and the player at 
fault if  necessary, and then indicate the team to  
serve.                                                           
                                                                    Rule 23.3.2.6 
 
SCORER AND ASSISTANT SCORER 
8.4.1  
Player #1 serves the ball and gains a point. After  
some discussion the Scorer then notifies the 2nd 
Referee that #2 should have served the previous 
service. How should the referees correct this  
situation? 
 
Reference: Case 10.22 
Ruling 
By the serving team maintaining all its points gained 
and the service resuming, with #2 serving. 
The score sheet may need correction to  
recommence the  match. If  the wrong  player is 
found to have served, they can only be penalized 
by loss of service if the Scorer (or one of the 
referees), had correctly notified them that they are 
the wrong server prior to their having served. In this 
case, the Scorer and the Assistant Scorer  have 
committed an error in their procedures by not  
having indicated the incorrect server prior to the  
serving. 
The 2nd Referee should never stop the rally, if the 
scorer finds out during the rally that the wrong 
server was making the service. 
             Rules 12.2.1, 12.2.2, 12.3, 12.6.1.1, 26.2.2.2, 
27.2.2.1, 27.2.2.2 
8.4.2  
Is a captain allowed to ask the scorer for the  
number of Time Outs requested by the other team? 
 
 
 
Reference: Case 10.23 
Ruling 
The Scorer should not respond to this request  and 
should notify the 2nd Referee. 
Captains may only request the number of  timeouts 
their team has used and may not do so repeatedly  
in order to delay the match. 
Rules 15.1, 16.1, 26.2 
 
 
 

 
 41 
LINE JUDGES 
8.5.1  
If one line judge signals out and the other one  
signals touch, what signal should the 1st R eferee 
take? 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee should have accepted the signal of  
both line judges regardless of the position on the 
court and then should make a final decision based 
on their signals. 
      Rules 28.2.1.1, 28.2.1.8, Referee Guidelines and 
Instructions 
8.5.2  
If a line judge calls for a foot fault during the 
execution of the service and both referees are  not 
noticing it during the rally, can a captain ask  the 
referee to consult the line judge after the end of the 
rally? 
Ruling 
Yes, the referee should ask the line judge to 
repeat the signal. Additionally, it is also acceptable 
for the referee to speak to the line judge about the  
decision and request him/ her to maintain the signal 
for a longer time. 
Rules 21.2, 28.2.1.3, 28.2.1.5, 28.2.2 
 
OFFICIAL’S SIGNALS  
8.6.1  
While serving, the server puts his foot under the  
service line, and the line judge signals this fault. 
What hand signal should the referee then use to 
show the nature of the fault? 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee should use signal 22 by pointing to  
the respective line. 
The referee must use this signal in order to  clearly 
show or clarify the nature of the fault. 
Rule 12.4.3, Signal 22 
8.6.2  
What is the correct order for a 2nd Referee to signal 
after whistling a net fault? 
Ruling 
When whistling a fault, the 2nd Referee should 
show the nature of the fault first, then, if necessary, 
the player at fault, and then finally wait for the 1st 
Referee to signal the team to serve and follow 
his/her signal. 
Rules 21.2.3.2, 21.2.3.3 
8.6.3  
If a served ball hits the server’s team mate,  what 
would be the correct hand signal by the 1st Referee? 
Ruling 
The 1st R eferee should signal the team to serve  
(signal 2), followed by signal 19 “served ball fails to 
pass to the opponent through crossing space”. 
Rule 12.6.2.1, signals 2 and 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 42 
 
 
 
 
9.1  
If after a direct ace finishing the match, the 1st  
Referee decides to call the ball out, is the  captain 
allowed to ask for a protest? 
Ruling 
The 1st  Referee must first determine whether  the 
protest is legitimate by considering the criteria  
under which  a protest can be lodged before 
initiating the Protest Protocol. In this case, the 1st  
Referee should have refused to initiate the Protest 
Protocol as ball in/out is a judgment call and cannot 
be protested. 
            Rules 5.1.2.1, 22.2.1, Referee Guidelines and 
Instructions 
9.2  
If one team is speeding up the game, and the 
other team wants to play at a slow pace, because of 
the heat, what pace should the 1st  Referee 
enforce? 
Ruling 
The referees should try as much as possible to 
keep the pace of the match constant.  Additionally,  
the Referees in this instance must be seen to  be 
neutral and equitable in their handling of the pace  
of the match, favouring neither team and warning  
or penalising as appropriate. 
Rule 16.1.3, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
9.3  
During a match, one of the players of team A raced 
quickly after the ball and made a sensational dig as  
he fell over the sponsorship. The player’s  
extraordinary effort drew great applause from the 
crowd. However, the player’s contact was slightly 
extended and the 1st  Referee blew his whistle and 
signaled the ball as a “Catch”? 
Ruling 
The referees should remember that they are not  
only the person who administers the match under  
the rules, but they allow under their guidance  the 
promotion of the sport of Beach Volleyball. 
Developing the spectacular element is an important 
aspect of any sport’s promotion. 
The referee must keep a balance between applying 
rigidly the technical requirements of the sport  with 
the promotional, cultural and societal aspects of  a 
sport. 
It is necessary for the referee to allow this  
spectacular action of the game to be emphasized at 
the expense of its technical nature. 
            Philosophy of Rules and Refereeing, Referee 
Guidelines and Instructions 
9.4  
If a player disagrees with the scorer and the  
referees about who is to serve, what should the  
referees check? 
 
Reference: Case 10.24 
Ruling 
There are 4 boxes labeled I to IV (1 -4) which 
correspond to the service order. The number of the 
player is inserted next to this box. The team  that 
serves first will be serving # I and # III in the 
serving order. The other team # II and # IV. The 
scorer follows a regular pattern in recording the 
services, regardless of which team commences the 
service, A (left side) or B (right side).  
It is important that the 2nd Referee checks that the 
                                                    CHAPTER 9 – SPECIAL CASES 

 
 43 
very first service of the match  is recorded next to 
the top box # I. This will ensure  that the service 
order is correctly initially recorded. 
Rule 7.6, Score sheet Instructions 
9.5 
If the hat of an attacking player falls from his /her 
head and is touching the top band of the net, is 
this considered as a fault? 
Ruling 
No, while the hat is considered part of the 
player’s uniform and therefore part of the player 
(who may not touch the net) this only applies if the 
hat is physically contacting (i.e., is on) the player. 
This rule would also apply to a watch,  glasses, 
jewellery or any other equipment or accessory 
that the player may be wearing. 
Rule 11.3.1, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
9.6  
Is it allowed for the captain to ask for a protest 
after finishing the match, when during the match no 
protest was being called? 
 
Reference: Case 10.25 
Ruling 
This protest should not be accepted, as the captain 
at the time of the actual incident did not register 
formally a protest ( i.e., did not request a Protest 
Protocol).  
Protests must be requested at the time of the 
occurrence. It may then be either referred to a 
Protest Protocol by the relevant FIVB Technical 
Delegate immediately (Level 1), or to the Organising 
Committee after the match (Level 2) depending on 
the circumstances. 
Rule 5.1.2.1, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
9.7  
A referee states to the Technical Delegate  that 
during his match he made several 
misinterpretations of  the rules. The teams 
protested against this during and after the match. 
What should the Technical Delegate now do? 
Ruling 
This situation presents a very difficult decision for  
the Technical Delegate . If all of the following had 
occurred, the TD should accept the protest of the 
players, hold a Protest Protocol (Level 2) and 
consider the possibility of replaying the match at 
the appropriate starting point: 
1) a t the time of the protest the teams  correctly 
signified their intention to protest to the  1st  
Referee, who refused accepting the protest. 
2) the protest was reaffirmed correctly as a Level 
2 protest after the match within 20 minutes  and 
signed by the respective captain. 
3) the protest satisfies the criteria for holding  a 
Protest Protocol (misinterpretation, etc.). 
4) the 1st  Referee (or other official) verifies that 
there was a misinterpretation, etc. (i.e., the protest 
is correct). 
5) that the protest was material to the result of 
the match. 
Rules 5.1.2.1, 5.1.3.2, Ref Guidelines & Instructions 

 
 44 
9.8 
If the captain of a team deliberately requests a TO 
at the last moment or even simultaneously with the 
whistle for serve by the 1st Referee, should the 2nd 
Referee whistle? 
Ruling 
No, the referees should not allow the timeout even 
if the request for timeout was prior to the signal for 
service. 
The timing of the whistles from the respective 
officials determines whether the timeout signal is  
accepted. As the 1st Referee had already authorized 
service, the timeout request should not be 
accepted. 
It is the responsibility of the captain to signal for a 
timeout early enough so that the referee may 
whistle before the authorization for service. 
Rule 15.5.1 
9.9 
The players of both teams switch sides when the 
court scoreboard reads 2:3 (Set 3). However, the 
Scorer points out quickly that the score is still 2:2  
and so no side change should have taken place.  
How should the referees correct this situation? 
Reference: Case 10.26 
Ruling 
The teams should quickly be requested to return 
to their  previous court sides and the match is 
resumed with the correct score indicated on the 
score sheet. 
 
Rules 18.2.1, 18.2.2 
9.10  
If a referee makes a mistake by awarding a point to 
one team, and the other team requests a TO before 
the referee changed his/her judgment call, does this 
TO still count? 
 
Reference: Case 10.27 
Ruling 
No, “since the referee’s decision (based on the  TO 
request) has been changed, the team may cancel 
the TO request”. The time out although legally  
requested should now be cancelled and the players 
requested to return to the court. 
Rule 22.2.1 
9.11 
Who has the responsibility to monitor the work of  
the ball retrievers? 
Ruling 
It is primarily the responsibility of the 1st Referee 
to monitor the work of the ball  retrievers, however 
the 2nd Referee can assist with this task. 
                   Rules 3.3, 22.2.2, Referee Guidelines and 
Instructions 
9.12  
Can a Technical Delegate reverse misconduct 
penalties given by the 1st Referee? 
Ruling 
No, this is not a task or duty of the  Technical 
Delegate. 
           Rules 20.1, 20.3.1, 22.2.1, Referee Guidelines 
and Instructions 
9.13  
When a referee sees a player entering the 
referee’s room complaining about a previous 
match, can the referee in the next match with the 
same player argue about this issue? 
Ruling 
No. At all times before, during and after a match 
a referee must behave in a professional manner.  
The behaviour of the player should be reported by  
the relevant officials and dealt with only by  the 
Technical Delegates. 
Philosophy of Rules and Refereeing, Referee 
Guidelines and Instructions 

 
 45 
9.14  
If a player running to an attack step into a deep hole 
in the sand, losing his/her balance to spike, should  
the 1st Referee call for a replay? 
Ruling 
No, in the case of the level of the sand being  
uneven, this is not considered to constitute 
normally a danger to the players. 
However, situations such as these can be prevented 
by the referees requiring the court to be  levelled 
between matches and the officials monitoring  the 
condition of the court during the match. 
                Rules 17.2, 22.2.5, Referee Guidelines and  
Instructions 
9.15  
Can a 1st Referee on his/ her own decide to initiate 
a Protest Protocol? 
And can a Technical Delegate  decide to replace  a 
line judge? 
Ruling 
It is not up to the 1st Referee  to commence a 
Protest Protocol before a team’s captain declares 
that they wish to protest. 
During the match, only the 1st Referee  has the 
authority to replace members of the refereeing  
corps who are not performing their functions  
properly. 
                   Rules 5.1.2.1, 22.2.1, Referee Guidelines 
and Instructions 
9.16  
If a coach is transmitting information on the hand  
signals of the opponent team to his/her team, what 
should the referees do? 
Ruling 
The referee(s) should inform the Delegate(s) of the 
situation as soon as is practicable. It is desirable that 
this causes as little delay to the match as is 
possible. 
The Technical Delegate s are then responsible for 
dealing with this situation. It may be required by the 
Technical Delegate that the match officials quickly 
summarize their observations (after the match).  
It is not possible for the referees to directly 
sanction coaches (as they are not participants) but 
if the actions of the coaches’ cause a delay to the 
match, a delay sanction must be applied to their 
team. 
Rules 4.1.4, 16.1, Ref Guidelines & Instructions 
9.17  
Can the Delegate(s) choose to view a video at some 
point during a Protest Protocol? 
Ruling 
The Protest Protocol procedures do not allow  a 
Referee Coach at Level 1 to view video footage 
from an unofficial source. (No video footage from 
an unofficial source can be used at any level of  
protest). 
Rule 5.1.2.1, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
9.18  
If a player during his/her action hits a cameraman 
who was there for the entire match, should  the 
referee call for a replay? 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee has the responsibility to judge all 
areas of external interference including members  
of the auxiliary corps, spectators and other objects 
/persons (Rules 17.2, and 17.3). 
All personnel in the playing area (members of  the 

 
 46 
refereeing crew, auxiliary corps, etc.) as well as 
court competition equipment, ( i.e.: TV cameras,  
microphones, etc.)  whose or which presence 
inside the free zone has been authorized before 
the start of the match, cannot be considered as 
creating external interference, unless : 
1) t here is a significant alteration to their  initial 
position (e.g., net camera falls during play) 
2) or there is a deliberate movement towards the 
player who is in the action of playing the ball (e.g., a 
ball retriever runs towards the ball or rolls the ball 
during play affecting the playing action of the  
player.) 
Accordingly, the decision of the 1st Referee will be 
based on the fact that the cameraman was in  a 
stationary position close to the court, or there  was 
significant alteration to his initial po sition or 
deliberate movement towards the player who was  
in the action of playing the ball. 
Rules 5.1.2.1, 17,2, Ref Guidelines & Instructions 
9.19  
During a Time Out, while the player sitting on the 
team bench and trying to drink, he was stitched by 
a wasp in the lip , and then while trying to push it 
away the wasp stitched him on the finger. 
 
How should the referees treat this medical 
assistance protocol?  
 
Ruling 
The Referees should be aware of the circumstances 
leading up to the injury/illness as they are 
responsible to establish its nature and extent (if 
minor or significant).  
In this case, there is a penetration of the skin 
despite the bleeding is not visible, so in case the 
treatment cannot be completed during the TO, or 
the case is more significant and so a medical 
assistance protocol is authorized by the 1st referee, 
then it should be judged as MTO.  
This could also be also the case for example of a 
player bleeding internally in the mouth cavity from 
cutting the tongue or the inside of the lip. 
     Rule 17.1.2, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 47 
 
 
 
The following cases are all written from a scorer’s perspective only, and can be utilised for training courses 
and instruction of scorers 
 
10.1  
Before the match, the two teams are warming up in 
the same colour of uniform. Is there any 
responsibility from the scorer in checking the team’s 
playing uniforms? 
 
Reference: Case 2.2.2 
Ruling 
The scorer and the assistant scorer should check all 
aspects of a team’s uniform prior to the match 
especially during the official warm up time. 
This includes the scorer checking that the correct 
players are wearing the correct uniform numbers 1 
and 2 as listed on the score sheet, and that the 
assistant scorer checks that the colours and the 
player numbers displayed on the scoreboards are in 
line with the players’ uniforms and the score sheet. 
Any concerns should immediately be conveyed to 
the referees. 
      Rules 4.3, 26.2.1.1, 27.2.1.1, Referee Guidelines 
and Instructions 
10.2  
What should the scorer do, if he/she finds out 
that two players are wearing numbers not  
corresponding the ones on the score sheet? 
 
Reference: Case 2.2.7 
Ruling 
This should be corrected by the players  changing 
quickly one or a combination of the uniforms.  No 
penalty shall apply. 
The scorer is specifically required to check that  the 
player’s name and uniform number matches.  The 
captain, by signing the score sheet is verifying that  
the team’s recorded details are correct. 
        Rules 5.1.1, 7.7.2, 26.2.1, Referee Guidelines  
and Instructions 
10.3  
What should the scorer do if a team captain 
walks away from the court directly after the match  
without having signed the score sheet? 
Ruling 
When the referees approach  the scorer’s table to 
verify the match score sheet, the scorer should 
immediately inform the referees that they have not 
received the captain’s signature on the score sheet. 
It is the scorer’s responsibility to complete the score 
sheet except for the official’s signatures and in 
some cases the remarks section. 
Rules 5.1.3.1, 26.2.3.3, Score sheet Instructions 
10.4  
What procedures should the scorer follow to record 
on the score sheet a default resulting from a medical 
injury? 
 
Reference: Case 3.1.1 
Ruling 
The scorer should complete the match with a 21-
0, 21 -0 (2 -0) result, including collecting the Pre -
match / Post Match signatures, match result at 
Results box and set score at Team  – Points row for 
sets 1 and 2  (0-21 crossed off and circled in both 
sets), etc. 
As instructed by the 1st Referee, the scorer should 
write in the remarks section information before this 
                                                   CHAPTER 10 – SCORER’S CASES 

 
 48 
and the final result is verified and signed by  the 
referees. 
Rules 6.4, 26.2.2.7, Score sheet Instructions 
10.5 
The teams finish their official warm up and enter  
the court to start their match. Player #1 for team  
“A” goes to the serving position. The  scorer 
immediately draws the referee’s attention to the  
fact that the score sheet states that the first server  
should be #2. What should the scorer now do? 
 
Reference: Case 4.2.1 
Ruling 
The scorer should wait until the referees have 
finished determining if there is the possibility of 
an error in the communication of the service order. 
If the 1st Referee authorises the #1 player of team 
A to serve, the scorer should just change team  A’s 
service order box. 
However, if the #2 player is made to serve, no  
change to the score sheet is necessary. 
The scorer is correct in informing the officials  and 
players of this problem but they cannot insist  the 
players change server. This is the responsibility of  
the referees. 
        Rules 7.7.2, 22.2.1, 22.3.1.2, 26.2.1.1, 26.2.2.2, 
Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
10.6  
After winning the coin toss the captain of Team  B 
returns to the court to determine the side.  After 
signing the score sheet, he didn’t inform the  scorer 
about his/her choice. What should the scorer do to 
ensure that this information is received? 
 
Reference: Case 4.1.1 
Ruling 
The scorer should be active in obtaining the decision 
for court and service order from team B. 
If neither the referees nor team have conveyed 
the decision to the scorer after 1 minute, the  
referees (usually 2nd Referee) should be informed 
of this. 
               Rules 7.1, 26.2.1.2, Referee Guidelines and 
Instructions, Score sheet Instructions 
10.7 
The captain of team “A”, at the end of the  “B” 
team’s timeout, requests a timeout. What  
procedure should the scorers follow now? 
 
Reference: Case 6.1.3 
Ruling 
The scorer should initially verify which team  called 
the time out and then record it in the appropriate  
box. While the teams are at their designated chairs  
the scorer should indicate to the 2nd Referee the 
team’s respective number of time outs used (both 
one). In this case no more timeouts are allowed.  
This would then be communicated by the  2nd 
Referee, not the scorer, to the 1st Referee and to 
the teams at the end of the timeout. 
Rules 23.2.6, 26.2.2.3 
10.8 
What should the scorer do if the 1st Referee gives a 
second delay warning in the set or match? 
 
Reference: Case 6.2.1 
Ruling 
Delay warnings are recorded on the score sheet  so 
the scorer should immediately notify the 1st 
Referee (via the 2nd Referee) of this error. 
Rules 16.2.1, 26.2 
10.9 
Is it allowed for the player to wipe his/her  head 
and/or arms with the small towel hanging at the net 
Ruling 
No, this is not allowed. The 1st Referee should 
consider this as intentional delay of the game  and 

 
 49 
pole, which is foreseen as a towel to clean the 
spectacles of the players? 
 
Reference: Case 6.2.4 
should give the player a delay sanction. 
Scorers must carefully check as to whether the team 
has received a verbal warning or a delay warning. If 
the scorer is unsure, he/ she should always check 
with the referees. 
             Rules 16.2, 26.2.2.6, Referee Guidelines and 
Instructions 
10.10  
What should a scorer do if a player after being  
injured leaves the court, going to the medical staff 
area, and doesn’t return after 5 minutes? 
 
Reference: Case 6.3.1 
Ruling 
It is important that the scorer records 2 sets of  
times: 
1) when did the 1st Referee whistle for initiating the 
“Medical Assistance” protocol? 
2) when did the 1st Referee whistle for ending the 
“Medical Assistance” protocol? (After the maximum 
authorized 5 minutes, or immediately after 
treatment is declared complete by the official 
medical personnel, or if no treatment can be 
provided, or when the player declares that he/she 
is ready to resume play). 
Additionally, the scorer should record in the  
remarks section the current score and the team and 
player serving at the time the referee stopped the  
match due to the injury. The scorer should record  
sufficient details to potentially enable the match to 
be recommenced in exactly the same position or 
for a Delegate to clearly calculate the duration of  
any stoppage.  
It is the responsibility of the 1st Referee  and the 
Delegate to record the reasons for the decision to 
declare the team incomplete in the remarks section 
of the score sheet. 
    Rules 6.4.3, 17.1, 23.2.7, 26.2.2.7, Ref Guidelines 
and Instructions, Score sheet Instructions 
10.11  
If there is a small blood injury, is the player allowed 
to quickly clean and bandage the cut? 
Should the scorer record any remarks about this  
short delay? 
Reference: Case 6.3.2 
Ruling 
The referees will allow a short time to be used by  
the player to correct this problem. 
No, the scorer should not record anything on  the 
score sheet, as no delay or “Medical TO” occurred. 
Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
10.12  
The 1st R eferee began the match with a delay  
warning. How would this be recorded on the score  
sheet? 
 
 
 
Reference: Case 6.2.5 
Ruling 
The scorer should record the time the match started 
after the delay (e.g., 09: 02) in the 1st set start 
time box. Then, the team concerned must  have 
recorded in its Delay sanction box the score of 0:0. 
Nothing should be written at this time in the  
remarks section of the score sheet. 
Rule 26.2.2.6, Score sheet Instructions 

 
 50 
10.13  
A team asks for the Technical Delegate to check 
the lack of light. The Technical Delegate stops the 
game and the match will start again the next 
morning with the score 0-0. How should the scorer 
record details of this decision? 
 
Reference: Case 6.3.6 
Ruling 
The scorer should not change any part of the 
score sheet except for recording in the remarks 
section of the score sheet, the exact time, current 
score and the team and player serving at the time 
the referee stopped the match due to lack of light.  
These same details should be recorded each time a 
match is stopped due to such events as rain, light or 
wind.  
The scorer should record sufficient details to  
potentially enable the match to be recommenced in 
exactly the same position or for a Technical 
Delegate to clearly  calculate the duration of any 
stoppage.  
It is the responsibility  of the 1st Referee and the 
Technical Delegate to record the  reasons for the 
decision to stop play and then  recommence the 
next day, in the remarks section of the score sheet. 
              Rules 17.3, 26.2.2.7, Referee Guidelines  
and Instructions, Score sheet Instructions 
10.14  
The 1st R eferee first gives a verbal warning to the 
team through the captain, and later shows a 
yellow card to one o f  t h e  players in the team  
repeating the minor misconduct.  
How should the scorer record these warnings to the 
players? 
Reference: Case 7.1.1 
Ruling 
Verbal warnings given by the 1st Referee are  not 
recorded on the score sheet.  
Only the misconduct formal warning later issued by 
the referee through the use of the yellow card will 
then be recorded at the appropriate box by the  
scorer. 
Rule 20.1, Score sheet Instructions 
10.15  
When a player receives a verbal warning and a 
yellow card in the 1st Set and in the following set 
receives a misconduct penalty, what additional 
action does a scorer need to do in the beginning of 
the 2nd Set? 
 
 
 
 
Reference: Case 7.1.2 
Ruling 
The scorer should record the misconduct  formal 
warning on the score sheet at the appropriate boxes 
for Set 1. 
Then, before the start of the 2nd  Set, the scorer  
should cross off the formal warning boxes for that  
team. 
In set 2 the scorer should directly record the penalty 
at the respective player’s misconduct sanctions first 
penalty box for that set. 
Rules 20.1, 20.2, 20.3, Score sheet Instructions 
10.16  
If the 1st  Referee gives a red card (misconduct  
penalty) for rude conduct, where should the scorer 
record this on the score sheet? 
 
Reference: Case 7.2.1 
Ruling 
This should be recorded in the misconduct sanctions 
section of the score sheet in the box corresponding 
to the penalized player. The score at the time of the 
penalty (not after) should be entered, and as 
there is an extra point scored it should be circled in 
the point’s row. 
The scorer must signal to the referees when he/she 

 
 51 
has finished recording the details of this sanction. 
At the end of the game, this offence  must be 
recorded accurately in the remarks section of  the 
score sheet, while clearly identifying the nature  
(type) of the offence in accordance with the  
“Misconduct sanction fee scale” description. 
Rule 20.3.1, Score sheet Instructions 
10.17  
In a match, a player receives a misconduct penalty  
for rude conduct. Later in the same set the same 
player is penalized again for rude conduct.  
What should the scorer do in this situation? 
 
Reference: Case 7.2.2 
Ruling 
The scorer should fill in the penalty at the  
respective player’s second misconduct sanctions 
penalty box  for that  set, and inform the 2nd 
Referee that the player has reached his limit for 
misconduct penalties in that set. 
Rule 20.3.1, Score sheet Instructions 
10.18  
During a match, a player pulled the net with  such 
force that it broke a post holding the net. The match 
was subsequently restarted on another court with  
the same score after a 1 -hour delay and a  
misconduct penalty to the offending player.  
How would the  scorer record the 1 -hour delay on 
the score sheet? 
 
 
Reference: Case 7.2.3 
Ruling 
The scorer should not change any part of the 
score sheet except for recording in the remarks 
section of the score sheet the exact time when the  
referee stopped the match due to net system 
failure, the current score - and due to the 
misconduct penalty, the opponent team will serve 
and gain one point extra. 
He / she should later record again at the  remarks’ 
section of the score sheet, the exact time the 
match recommenced and the new court. These 
remarks should contain sufficient details for a 
Technical Delegate to clearly calculate the duration 
of any stoppage. 
It is  the responsibility of the 1st R eferee and 
Technical Delegate to record the reasons for the 
decision to stop play and then recommence on 
another court on the score sheet (remarks section). 
Rule 17.3, Score sheet Instructions 
10.19  
After the 1st Referee issues a misconduct  penalty 
between two sets, what action should the  scorer 
apply? 
 
Reference: Case 7.2.5 
Ruling 
The 1st Referee must apply the sanction at the start 
of the next set. 
After showing the red card to the relevant  player, 
he/she must then show the other team to serve. 
If the team which was sanctioned with the penalty  
was to serve, the opponents get the right to serve  
and must rotate one position. 
If the team which was sanctioned with the penalty  
was receiving, the opponents will receive 1 point  
and keep the service order. 
This should be recorded by the scorer, as  
appropriate, including the fact that at the point’s 
row, this point should be circled because it came 

 
 52 
from a penalty. In addition to this the scorer should 
record the  sanction at the appropriate player’s 
misconduct sanctions penalty box for the third set, 
with the score 0:0 
At the end of the game, this offence  must be 
recorded accurately in the remarks section of  the 
score sheet, clearly identifying the nature (type)  of 
the offence in accordance to the “Misconduct 
sanction fee scale” description. 
Rules 20.3.1, 20.4, Score sheet Instructions 
10.20  
If after receiving a misconduct penalty a  player 
disagreeing with the referee’s decision, tears  
his/her uniform in anger and the 1st Referee 
considers this as  a rude conduct, how should the 
scorer record this? 
 
Reference: Case 7.2.6 
Ruling 
The scorer should cross off the both points in  the 
respective Team -Points row. As each of these  
points was gained by a penalty they should 
additionally be circled. 
The recording of both offences in the remarks  
section of  the score sheet must be written 
accurately while clearly identifying the nature 
(type) of each of the offences in accordance to the 
“Misconduct sanction fee scale” description. 
Rule 20.3.1, Score sheet Instructions 
10.21  
If a player, after the match has been completed 
by the 1st Referee, gets upset and removes the 
padding from the post and tears the court number 
off the referee’s stand, how should this action - 
although it occurs after the completion of the match 
- be recorded on the score sheet? 
 
 
 
Reference: Case 7.2.7 
Ruling 
The scorer does not make the decision about  
whether to let a player or referee write in the 
remarks   section of the score sheet. This is the 
responsibility of  the referees and  Technical 
Delegate. 
The 1st Referee should use the remarks section  to 
record information about this problem even after  
the match has been completed and the result  
verified. 
Rule 20.4, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
10.22 
Player #1 serves the ball and gains a point. After  
some discussion the scorer then notifies the 2nd  
Referee that #2 should have served the previous 
service. What is the next step for the scorer? 
 
Reference: Case 8.4.1 
Ruling 
To ensure that the serving team maintains all  its 
points gained, and the service resumes with #2 
serving. 
The score sheet may need correction to  
recommence the match. 
If an incorrect player is found to have served, 
they can only be penalized by loss of service if the 
scorer (or one of the referees), had correctly 
notified them that he / she is an incorrect server, 
prior to them serving. 
In this case the scorer and the assistant scorer 
have committed an error in their procedures by not 
having indicated the incorrect server prior to the 
service hit. 

 
 53 
The 2nd Referee should never stop the rally if the 
scorer finds out during the rally, that the wrong 
server was making the service 
             Rules 12.2.1, 12.2.2, 12.3, 12.6.1.1, 26.2.2.2, 
27.2.2.1, 27.2.2.2 
10.23  
What is the correct response from the scorer, if  a 
captain asks the number of Time Outs of the 
opposite team? 
Reference: Case 8.4.2 
Ruling 
The scorer should not respond to this request  but 
should notify the 2nd  Referee who should ask the 
teams to resume the match.  
                                                 Rules 15.1, 16.1, 26.2 
10.24  
If a player disagrees with the scorer and the  
referees about who is to serve, what should the 
scorer check? 
 
Reference: Case 9.4 
Ruling 
The score sheet is designed to allow the service  
order to be checked easily. 
There are 4 boxes labeled I to IV (1 -4) which 
corresponds to the service order. The number of  
the player is inserted next to this box. The team that 
serves first will be serving #I and #III in the  serving 
order. The other team #II and #IV. The scorer  
follows a regular pattern in recording the services,  
regardless of which team commences the service, A 
(left side) or B (right side).  
It is important that the 2nd Referee checks that the 
very first service of the match is recorded next to 
the t op box # I.  This will ensure that the service 
order is correctly recorded in the first instance. 
Rule 26.2.2.2, Score sheet Instructions 
10.25 
If the captain, after finishing the match, asks to 
write a protest on the score sheet, when during the 
match no protest was being called, should the 
scorer allow the recording of this protest? 
Reference: Case 9.6 
Ruling 
No. The scorer can only permit the captain  
concerned to write a statement on the incident 
being protested with the authorization of the 1st 
Referee. 
Rule 26.2.3.2, Referee Guidelines and Instructions 
10.26  
The players of both teams switch sides when the 
court scoreboard reads 2:3 (Set 3). However,  the 
scorer points out quickly that the score is still 2:2  
and so no side change should have taken place.  
What techniques should a scorer use to prevent this 
error? 
 
 
Reference: Case 9.9 
Ruling 
The scorer should always announce point to switch  
to the 2nd Referee (e.g., 2:2) and then announce  
side switch ( e.g., 3:2). Referees should  
appropriately acknowledge both of these 
announcements from the scorer. In this case the 
scorer was correct in quickly correcting  the 
incorrect side switch so as to avoid a long delay to 
the match. 
Rules 18.2.1, 26.2.2.5 
10.27  
If a referee makes a mistake awarding a point to  
one team, and the other team requests a TO before 
the referee changes his judgment call, the TO is then 
cancelled. In this case what should the scorer do? 
Reference: Case 9.10 
Ruling 
The scorer should cancel the recording of the  time 
out and correct the score row and service order  
boxes. 
 
Rules 22.2.1, 26.2.2.1, 26.2.2.2, 26.2.2.3 

 
 54 
10.28 (revised) 
After being treated for 5 minutes during a  Medical 
Time Out, the player is declared unable to continue.  
What steps should the scorer take to record all the 
circumstances of this medical injury? 
Ruling 
It is important that the scorer records 2 sets of  
times: 
1) when did the 1st referee initiate the protocol? 
2) w hen did the play resume, or in this  specific 
circumstance, when was the team  declared 
incomplete? 
This recording should be done in hours / minutes  / 
seconds. 
Additionally, the scorer should record sufficient  
details to allow him/ her to complete the score 
sheet in case the team is declared incomplete. 
       Rules 6.4.3, 7.1.2.3, 17.1, 23.2.7, 23.3.1, 26.2.1, 
26.2.2.7, Scoresheet Instructions 
10.29 
After the Scorer having started the match and 
completed the first set with the use of the paper 
scoresheet, the “VolleyStation” operator replicated 
all relevant data at the e -scoresheet, i.e.: score, 
rotations, TOs, TTO, plus court switches, etc., with 
then the Scorer keep completing the match at the 
e-scoresheet.  
 
Should the e-scoresheet of the match be considered 
a valid official document? 
Ruling 
It is the responsibility of the 2nd referee to monitor 
the work of the Scorer. The 2nd referee should have 
been aware of the situation, and have prevented 
that the Scorer abandoned the filling in of the paper 
scoresheet in the middle of the process, as this is 
the only document for that match that, if complete, 
can be taken as the official document of the match.  
Trying to reproduce, not in the real time the data at 
the e-scoresheet for an entire set, is inaccurate as it 
is impossible to reproduce the exact and real 
timings of the match.  
  Rules 23.2.3, 23.3.1, 26.2, Scoresheet Instructions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 55 
PART III – TERMINOLOGY 
 
Antennae A flexible rod, 1.8m in length, placed vertically and above the outer edge of the  
sidelines to mark the outer limit of the crossing space. The antennae are placed 
on opposite sides of the net. The ball must cross the net completely between the 
2 antennae to be considered “in”. Contrasting 10cm coloured strips are used to 
80cm height above net. 
Attack Hit The action of directing the ball into the opponent’s court. Serving is not 
considered an attack hit. Considered completed when the ball completely crosses 
the vertical plane of the net or touches a block. 
Ball mark The disturbance or movement of the sand created on the court surface by the 
contact of the ball with the sand. This mark may be checked to determine if the 
ball is “in” or “out”. 
Ball Mark Protocol A procedure initiated either by request of one of the members in the Team or by 
the 1st  Referee for establishing whether the ball has landed in  or out of the 
playing court. Conducted as per the FIVB Ball Mark Protocol procedures. 
Between rallies The time between the whistle for completion of a rally and the whistle for service 
authorization. Under normal circumstances this is a maximum of 12 seconds. 
Cap / Hat Apparel worn on the player’s head. Considered, as part of player’s uniform when 
physically on the player. Some aspects are governed by FIVB regulations. 
Coin Toss The action of the 1st Referee prior to the match, of requesting the captains of 
each team to come to an area in front of the scorer’s table. This process 
determines the team  to serve the starting side of the court for each team and 
player service orders. 
Court Lines 
(boundary lines) 
These lines delimit the playing court. They are made of resistant material, 
contrast in colour to the sand and are 5 -8 cm wide. The ball must physically 
contact the line to be considered as “in”. 
Court Manager Tournament official responsible for maintaining the court and equipment to the 
specified technical requirements for the tournament. 
Court switches 
(side changes) 
The interval in which the teams change their sides of the playing court. Occurs 
every 7 points (Sets 1 and 2) and 5 points (3rd Set). 
Cover up a fault A misconduct where a player acts deliberately so that an official will not be able  
to ascertain a fault (i.e., they obscure the fault from the officials), e.g., removing 
a ball mark. 
Crossing space The area above the net and inside the antennas (and their imaginary extension  
upward) through which the ball must pass (by the attacking team) completely for 
play to  continue legally by the defending team. This area does not include 
external and lower spaces.  Play in some cases may continue even if the ball 
crosses the net outside the crossing space  as long as the team can retrieve the 
ball and play it legally within its 3 hits through the crossing space. 
Default Where a team is unable to commence the match legally with its players. It forfeits 
the match and gains no points. 
Defensive player 
(defending player) 
The player(s) from the team who currently have not committed the last contact. 
The player(s) on the opposite side of the court to the ball. 
Designated chairs The chairs allocated to each team for its use during match protocol and intervals. 
Located 3-5 metres from the scorers’ table. Each team uses the same chairs for 
the entire match. Usually separate and non-metal in construction. 
Diagonals  
(Long / Short) 
The distance diagonally across the corners of the rectangular shaped 16x8m 
playing court (long) or across from one corner to the corner immediately under 

 
 56 
the net (short) of one side of the playing court (8x8m). 
Double fault 
(replay) 
Two faults occurring at the same time. Results in a replay (the same person 
serving again with no point scored). 
External space The imaginary area outside the antennas and also not below the bottom of the  
net between the net poles. The area not including the Crossing and lower spaces. 
Extension of 
sideline 
The imaginary line extended from the 2 sidelines in a straight line from the 
corners until the edge of the free zone. A service must be completed from within 
the area delimited by these imaginary lines. 
First hit of the team There are three cases, when the playing action is considered first hit of the team:  
- Service reception  
- Receiving an attack of the opponent team  
- Playing the ball rebounding from opponent’s block  
Foot fault The illegal action of a player, who at the time of serving or jumping to serve 
contacts the line has their foot under the line or their foot, contacts the playing  
court. 
Forbidden object A player’s personal apparel item that may cause injury or give advantage to that 
or another player. May include jewellery, glasses and plaster casts. 
Free Zone The area outside the playing court but inside the panels, signage etc which 
delimits the outer edges of the free zone. 
Hard driven ball An attack hit that is travelling with sufficient speed (quickly) and over distance 
such that the defending player has time to only play the ball in an uncontrolled  
(reflexive) defensive manner. 
The time and distance of the balls trajectory (speed of the ball) does not allow 
the player to substantially control or alter their techniques for receiving the ball. 
Hoses The devices used to spread water on the playing court and free zone to reduce 
the surface temperature of the sand. Located near the outside of the free zone. 
Ice box  
(ice chest) 
Item of equipment located in or near players designated area for storage of 
liquids or ice for use by players and / or officials. 
Illegal server When a player serves contrary to the service order recorded on the score sheet  
and advice of the scorer. The other team gains the right to serve and a point. 
Incidental contact Contact by a player with an opponent that did not have an effect on that player’s 
ability to complete a subsequent play on the ball freely. 
Incomplete team When a team commences but is unable to legally complete a match with its two 
players, i.e. due to injury - the other team would then gain enough points to 
complete the match. 
Interference When a player through physical contact or threat of contact prevents an 
opponent from  a potential play on the ball. It may be the next shot or a 
subsequent shot. 
Improper requests When a player requests an interruption to the match that is not legal. For 
example, asking for a Timeout after the referee has authorized service. 
Joust Two players simultaneously contacting the ball with open fingers/ hands above 
the height of the net, and there is an extended contact with the ball. 
Protest Protocol The formal process under the control of the Technical Delegate(s) in which the 
validity of a team’s Protest is considered. This may occur during or after a match. 
Applied under FIVB Protest Protocol Regulations. 
Jump Serve The action of a serving player, who at the time of the service is not in contact 
with the ground. The action of jumping must commence legally from within the 
service zone but on landing may contact any part of the playing court or free zone. 

 
 57 
Levelling the sand/ 
Raking 
The process of flattening or levelling the playing court and its immediate  
surrounding area. This is usually done prior to the match commencing. 
Line judges Auxiliary officials responsible for assisting the referees in determining faults esp. 
ball “in”, “out”, “touched” or passing to opponent court outside the crossing 
space. Either 2 or 4 people can be used, situated at corners of the court. 
Lower space (under 
net) 
The area below the bottom of the net between the net posts. The area not 
including the Crossing and External spaces. 
Match format Determines the structure of the match sets. Format for FIVB competition is best 
of 3 sets, the first 2 being played to 21 (with 2 point advantage) and the 3rd set to 
15 (with a 2 point advantage), both with no maximum score. 
Measuring rod 
(stick or pole) 
A device for measuring the height of the net. Indicative marks are present for all 
net heights. It should be kept near to the scorer’s table. 
Medical Assistance 
protocols 
The FIVB regulations controlling the circumstance of a player being injured. 
Applied under “Medical Time Out” (MTO), and “Recovery Interruption” (RIT). 
Metal fastening 
devices 
An illegal method of securing the lines under the sand. Fastening devices must 
be of soft flexible material. 
Momentarily 
overhand with 
fingers / beach dig / 
defence 
A playing action (receiving a ball) that may be legally used if the ball is hard  
driven. 
Players are allowed legally to have contact with the ball when played overhand 
which is of slightly extended duration than is usually allowed. The hands must be 
held with fingers up, i.e. not inverted to point downwards. 
Misconduct 
sanction fee scale 
Beach Pro Tour specific regulation establishing the fines to be issued in  case 
players abuse court equipment or officials (this is to be enforced in due 
accordance to sanctions issued by the 1st referee during the match). 
Nature of the fault What type of error has occurred or what has happened. The referee may signal 
what has happened, e.g. ball in. 
Net The piece of equipment consisting of many small square meshes hung between 
two posts that separate the two sides of the court. Dimensions are 8.5 x 1 metre. 
Net area The area immediately below the bottom of the net between the posts. It consists 
of the playing surface and imaginary space above it. 
Normal playing 
conditions 
Playing conditions which are free from external interference from weather (e.g. 
wind, rain). Generally based on whether players can accurately hand set the ball. 
Number paddles The equipment used by the scorer to indicate the player to serve next (i.e., 
service order of the team now serving). Located on Scorer’s Table. #1 and #2 
Offensive player 
(attacking player) 
The player(s) from the team who currently have committed the last contact. The 
player(s) on the same side of the court as the ball. 
Overhand finger 
action 
The playing action of setting the ball or passing the ball with 2 hands fingers  
spread, contacting the  ball. It is not legal to catch and throw the ball with 
underhand finger action (i.e.: wrists inverted). 
Padding Protective equipment located on the net posts and referee’s chair for the 
protection of the players. 
Perpendicular 
trajectory 
A ball that travels in a straight line from the player’s shoulders either forwards or 
backwards. The player’s position at the time of first contact determines the 
trajectory the ball should legally follow. 
Player’s uniforms The player’s personnel apparel covering the body. Includes shirt, shorts and 
optional cap. Applied under FIVB Uniform regulations. 
Playing Court The area bounded by the court lines. A rectangle measuring 16 x 8 metres. The 
lines are included in this area and the ball is therefore considered “in” if it touches 
the line. 

 
 58 
Point of contact 
(instant of contact) 
The moment that a player first contacts the ball. Initial contact time or time of  
contacting. 
Protocol The series of events before the start of the match, including the toss, the 
warming-up session, presentation of the teams and referees described in the 
Specific Competition Handbook. 
Protest (see Protest 
Protocol) 
The action of requesting a Protest Protocol. Made if a player wishes to formally 
question a decision of a referee. Applied under FIVB Protest Protocol Regulations. 
Rain Weather condition involving moisture or precipitation. If strong and normal  
playing conditions are not possible may result in play being suspended. 
Rally The time that the ball is legally in play, from the contact with the ball by the 
server, to the time of a fault by either team or when the ball hits the ground. 
Replay  
(tie ball) 
When the referee authorises a service to be made again with no point or side -
out being made to either team. This could be as a result of  e.g.: simultaneous 
fault, incorrect decision or external interference. 
Roll shot Legal technique using rigid, closed fingers in an overhead single hand action to  
complete an attack hit. Usually travels a short distance into the opponent’s court. 
Rubber booties 
(sand-shoes / 
socks) 
Personal player’s equipment for protection of their feet. Usually used if sand is 
too hot / cold or player is injured. Requires the referee’s permission before use. 
Sand The material composing the court surface. Must be flat, uniform, and safe for 
participants and at least 40cm in depth. 
Sand Anchors The device, which secures the lines by use of a cord to the court, surface (50 cm 
below the ground minimum). Material must be soft and flexible. 
Sand Levellers 
(rakers) 
Auxiliary officials responsible for keeping the court surface in good condition. 
Screen The action of preventing the player(s) receiving service from having a clear  and 
unobstructed view of the serving player. A screen is illegal. 
Service order The order in which players can legally serve. Recorded on the score sheet after 
the coin toss has been made. Must be maintained throughout the match. 
Service Zone The area in which the player serves the ball. Bounded by the base (back line), the 
extension of the two sidelines and the outside of the free zone (usually delimited 
by panels). 
Service reception 
positions 
The positions that the team receiving service adopts prior to the referee  
authorizing service. Usually in the middle of each side of the playing court. 
Spike The play action of jumping and striking with one hand the ball as an attack hit. 
Sun  
(sunlight / light) 
Weather condition essential for play. Light must be a minimum of 1000 Lux. 
Sunglasses Player’s personnel equipment for protection from weather and sand in the eyes. 
FIVB Delegates Official(s) with responsibility to run the tournament. 
Two types (Jobs defined by FIVB Beach Volleyball Handbook): 
- Technical Delegate (responsibility for technical matters) 
- Refereeing Coach (responsibility for refereeing matters). 
Tarp A large material cover for protecting the surface of the court from weather  
conditions. Usually 16 x 8 m minimum size. 
Technical Timeout An official 30 second interruption to the match that occurs in sets 1 and 2 when 
the sum of both team’s points is 21. 
Time of contact The duration that the ball was in contact with a player’s hands in completing a  
shot. 

 
 59 
Timeout A 30-second match interval requested by a player. Maximum of 1 per set per 
team and must be approved by the officials. 
Tip / Dink Illegal technique using open fingers (spread fingertips) to complete an attack hit. 
Toss The action of releasing the ball from the players hands in the service zone with  
the intention of hitting a service. 
Towels Equipment used by players for drying or cleaning their body. Equipment used by 
officials for drying or cleaning the match balls. Comes in various sizes. 
Umbrella Equipment for protection from the weather esp. sun. Located in players’ 
designated areas and behind the scorer’s table. 
Warm up Period 
(official warm up) 
The time before the match officially allocated for teams to prepare on the court 
for the match. Commences at the whistle (signal) of the 1st  Referee after the 
signing of the score sheet. Applied under FIVB Protocol regulations. 
Water bucket Equipment used for storage of water. May be used in case of injury or for court  
watering. 
Watering the Court The action of spreading water over the playing court and free zone for the 
purpose of lowering the surface temperate of the sand. Usually done prior to the 
start of the match. 
Wind Weather condition. Strength should be low enough to enable normal playing  
conditions. 
5 min recovery 
period (Medical 
Assistance) 
The maximum time allowed for a player to recover from an injury. Controlled by 
the 1st Referee. Applied under FIVB “Medical Assistance” protocols (MTO and 
RIT). 
 
 
 

